<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Systematic Theology (Volume 1 of 3)</title>
      <title type="sub">The Doctrine of God</title>
      <author><name reg="Strong, Augustus Hopkins">Augustus Hopkins Strong</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>October 25, 2013</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">44035</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
      <language id="zh"></language>
      <language id="ar"></language>
      <language id="sa"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2013-10-25">October 25, 2013</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Colin Bell, CCEL, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Systematic Theology</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">A Compendium and Commonplace-Book</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Designed For The Use Of Theological Students</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Augustus Hopkins Strong, D.D., LL.D.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">President and Professor of Biblical Theology in the Rochester Theological Seminary</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Revised and Enlarged</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">In Three Volumes</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Volume 1</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">The Doctrine of God</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">The Judson Press</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Philadelphia, Boston, Chicago, St. Louis, Los Angeles, Kansas City, Seattle, Toronto</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1907</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
<figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 40%'>
<figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter at
Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]
</p>
</div>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>

<p>
Christo Deo Salvatori.
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>The eye sees only that which it brings with it the power
of seeing.</hi></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cicero.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things
out of thy law.</hi></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Psalm 119:18.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>For with thee is the fountain of life: In thy light shall
we see light.</hi></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Psalm 36:9.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>For we know in part, and we prophesy in part; but when
that which is perfect is come, that which is in part
shall be done away.</hi></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>1 Cor. 13:9, 10.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface</head>

<p>
The present work is a revision and enlargement of my
<q>Systematic Theology,</q> first published in 1886. Of the original
work there have been printed seven editions, each edition embodying
successive corrections and supposed improvements. During
the twenty years which have intervened since its first publication
I have accumulated much new material, which I now offer to the
reader. My philosophical and critical point of view meantime has
also somewhat changed. While I still hold to the old doctrines, I
interpret them differently and expound them more clearly, because
I seem to myself to have reached a fundamental truth which
throws new light upon them all. This truth I have tried to set
forth in my book entitled <q>Christ in Creation,</q> and to that book
I refer the reader for further information.
</p>

<p>
That Christ is the one and only Revealer of God, in nature, in
humanity, in history, in science, in Scripture, is in my judgment
the key to theology. This view implies a monistic and idealistic
conception of the world, together with an evolutionary idea as to
its origin and progress. But it is the very antidote to pantheism,
in that it recognizes evolution as only the method of the transcendent
and personal Christ, who fills all in all, and who makes the
universe teleological and moral from its centre to its circumference
and from its beginning until now.
</p>

<p>
Neither evolution nor the higher criticism has any terrors to one
who regards them as parts of Christ's creating and educating process.
The Christ in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge himself furnishes all the needed safeguards and limitations.
It is only because Christ has been forgotten that nature and
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
law have been personified, that history has been regarded as unpurposed
development, that Judaism has been referred to a merely
human origin, that Paul has been thought to have switched the
church off from its proper track even before it had gotten fairly
started on its course, that superstition and illusion have come to
seem the only foundation for the sacrifices of the martyrs and the
triumphs of modern missions. I believe in no such irrational and
atheistic evolution as this. I believe rather in him in whom all
things consist, who is with his people even to the end of the world,
and who has promised to lead them into all the truth.
</p>

<p>
Philosophy and science are good servants of Christ, but they are
poor guides when they rule out the Son of God. As I reach my
seventieth year and write these words on my birthday, I am thankful
for that personal experience of union with Christ which has
enabled me to see in science and philosophy the teaching of my
Lord. But this same personal experience has made me even more
alive to Christ's teaching in Scripture, has made me recognize in
Paul and John a truth profounder than that disclosed by any
secular writers, truth with regard to sin and atonement for sin,
that satisfies the deepest wants of my nature and that is self-evidencing
and divine.
</p>

<p>
I am distressed by some common theological tendencies of our
time, because I believe them to be false to both science and
religion. How men who have ever felt themselves to be lost sinners
and who have once received pardon from their crucified Lord
and Savior can thereafter seek to pare down his attributes, deny
his deity and atonement, tear from his brow the crown of miracle
and sovereignty, relegate him to the place of a merely moral teacher
who influences us only as does Socrates by words spoken across a
stretch of ages, passes my comprehension. Here is my test of
orthodoxy: Do we pray to Jesus? Do we call upon the name of
Christ, as did Stephen and all the early church? Is he our living
<pb n='ix'/><anchor id='Pgix'/>
Lord, omnipresent, omniscient, omnipotent? Is he divine only
in the sense in which we are divine, or is he the only-begotten Son,
God manifest in the flesh, in whom is all the fulness of the
Godhead bodily? What think ye of the Christ? is still the critical
question, and none are entitled to the name of Christian who, in the
face of the evidence he has furnished us, cannot answer the question
aright.
</p>

<p>
Under the influence of Ritschl and his Kantian relativism, many
of our teachers and preachers have swung off into a practical denial
of Christ's deity and of his atonement. We seem upon the verge
of a second Unitarian defection, that will break up churches and
compel secessions, in a worse manner than did that of Channing
and Ware a century ago. American Christianity recovered from
that disaster only by vigorously asserting the authority of Christ
and the inspiration of the Scriptures. We need a new vision of
the Savior like that which Paul saw on the way to Damascus and
John saw on the isle of Patmos, to convince us that Jesus is lifted
above space and time, that his existence antedated creation, that he
conducted the march of Hebrew history, that he was born of a
virgin, suffered on the cross, rose from the dead, and now lives
forevermore, the Lord of the universe, the only God with whom we
have to do, our Savior here and our Judge hereafter. Without a
revival of this faith our churches will become secularized, mission
enterprise will die out, and the candlestick will be removed out of
its place as it was with the seven churches of Asia, and as it has
been with the apostate churches of New England.
</p>

<p>
I print this revised and enlarged edition of my <q>Systematic
Theology,</q> in the hope that its publication may do something to
stem this fast advancing tide, and to confirm the faith of God's
elect. I make no doubt that the vast majority of Christians still
hold the faith that was once for all delivered to the saints, and that
they will sooner or later separate themselves from those who deny
<pb n='x'/><anchor id='Pgx'/>
the Lord who bought them. When the enemy comes in like a
flood, the Spirit of the Lord will raise up a standard against him.
I would do my part in raising up such a standard. I would lead
others to avow anew, as I do now, in spite of the supercilious
assumptions of modern infidelity, my firm belief, only confirmed
by the experience and reflection of a half-century, in the old
doctrines of holiness as the fundamental attribute of God, of an
original transgression and sin of the whole human race, in a divine
preparation in Hebrew history for man's redemption, in the deity,
preëxistence, virgin birth, vicarious atonement and bodily resurrection
of Jesus Christ our Lord, and in his future coming to judge
the quick and the dead. I believe that these are truths of science
as well as truths of revelation; that the supernatural will yet be
seen to be most truly natural; and that not the open-minded theologian
but the narrow-minded scientist will be obliged to hide his
head at Christ's coming.
</p>

<p>
The present volume, in its treatment of Ethical Monism, Inspiration,
the Attributes of God, and the Trinity, contains an antidote
to most of the false doctrine which now threatens the safety of the
church. I desire especially to call attention to the section on
Perfection, and the Attributes therein involved, because I believe
that the recent merging of Holiness in Love, and the practical
denial that Righteousness is fundamental in God's nature, are
responsible for the utilitarian views of law and the superficial views
of sin which now prevail in some systems of theology. There can
be no proper doctrine of the atonement and no proper doctrine of
retribution, so long as Holiness is refused its preëminence. Love
must have a norm or standard, and this norm or standard can be
found only in Holiness. The old conviction of sin and the sense of
guilt that drove the convicted sinner to the cross are inseparable
from a firm belief in the self-affirming attribute of God as logically
prior to and as conditioning the self-communicating attribute. The
<pb n='xi'/><anchor id='Pgxi'/>
theology of our day needs a new view of the Righteous One. Such
a view will make it plain that God must be reconciled before man
can be saved, and that the human conscience can be pacified only
upon condition that propitiation is made to the divine Righteousness.
In this volume I propound what I regard as the true Doctrine
of God, because upon it will be based all that follows in the
volumes on the Doctrine of Man, and the Doctrine of Salvation.
</p>

<p>
The universal presence of Christ, the Light that lighteth every
man, in heathen as well as in Christian lands, to direct or overrule
all movements of the human mind, gives me confidence that the
recent attacks upon the Christian faith will fail of their purpose.
It becomes evident at last that not only the outworks are assaulted,
but the very citadel itself. We are asked to give up all belief in
special revelation. Jesus Christ, it is said, has come in the flesh
precisely as each one of us has come, and he was before Abraham
only in the same sense that we were. Christian experience knows
how to characterize such doctrine so soon as it is clearly stated.
And the new theology will be of use in enabling even ordinary
believers to recognize soul-destroying heresy even under the mask
of professed orthodoxy.
</p>

<p>
I make no apology for the homiletical element in my book. To
be either true or useful, theology must be a passion. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pectus est
quod theologum facit</foreign>, and no disdainful cries of <q>Pectoral
Theology!</q> shall prevent me from maintaining that the eyes of the
heart must be enlightened in order to perceive the truth of God,
and that to know the truth it is needful to do the truth. Theology
is a science which can be successfully cultivated only in connection
with its practical application. I would therefore, in every discussion
of its principles, point out its relations to Christian experience,
and its power to awaken Christian emotions and lead to Christian
decisions. Abstract theology is not really scientific. Only that
theology is scientific which brings the student to the feet of Christ.
</p>

<pb n='xii'/><anchor id='Pgxii'/>

<p>
I would hasten the day when in the name of Jesus every knee shall
bow. I believe that, if any man serve Christ, him the Father will
honor, and that to serve Christ means to honor him as I honor the
Father. I would not pride myself that I believe so little, but
rather that I believe so much. Faith is God's measure of a man.
Why should I doubt that God spoke to the fathers through the
prophets? Why should I think it incredible that God should raise
the dead? The things that are impossible with men are possible
with God. When the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the
earth? Let him at least find faith in us who profess to be his
followers. In the conviction that the present darkness is but
temporary and that it will be banished by a glorious sunrising, I
give this new edition of my <q>Theology</q> to the public with the
prayer that whatever of good seed is in it may bring forth fruit,
and that whatever plant the heavenly Father has not planted may
be rooted up.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rochester Theological Seminary,<lb/>
Rochester, N. Y., August 3, 1906.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part I. Prolegomena.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Idea Of Theology.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Definition of Theology.</head>

<p>
Theology is the science of God and of the relations
between God and the universe.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Though the word <q>theology</q> is sometimes employed in dogmatic writings to
designate that single department of the science which treats of the divine nature and
attributes, prevailing usage, since Abelard (A. D. 1079-1142) entitled his general treatise
<q>Theologia Christiana,</q> has included under that term the whole range of Christian
doctrine. Theology, therefore, gives account, not only of God, but of those relations
between God and the universe in view of which we speak of Creation, Providence and
Redemption.
</p>

<p>
John the Evangelist is called by the Fathers <q>the theologian,</q> because he most fully
treats of the internal relations of the persons of the Trinity. Gregory Nazianzen
(328) received this designation because he defended the deity of Christ against the
Arians. For a modern instance of this use of the term <q>theology</q> in the narrow sense,
see the title of Dr. Hodge's first volume: <q>Systematic Theology, Vol. I: <hi rend='italic'>Theology</hi>.</q>
But theology is not simply <q>the science of God,</q> nor even <q>the science of God and
man.</q> It also gives account of the relations between God and the universe.
</p>

<p>
If the universe were God, theology would be the only science. Since the universe is
but a manifestation of God and is distinct from God, there are sciences of nature and of
mind. Theology is <q>the science of the sciences,</q> not in the sense of including all these
sciences, but in the sense of using their results and of showing their underlying ground;
(see Wardlaw, Theology, 1:1, 2). Physical science is not a part of theology. As a mere
physicist, Humboldt did not need to mention the name of God in his <q>Cosmos</q> (but see
Cosmos, 2:418, where Humboldt says: <q>Psalm 104 presents an image of the whole
Cosmos</q>). Bishop of Carlisle: <q>Science is atheous, and therefore cannot be atheistic.</q>
</p>

<p>
Only when we consider the relations of finite things to God, does the study of them
furnish material for theology. Anthropology is a part of theology, because man's
nature is the work of God and because God's dealings with man throw light upon the
character of God. God is known through his works and his activities. Theology
therefore gives account of these works and activities so far as they come within our
knowledge. All other sciences require theology for their complete explanation. Proudhon:
<q>If you go very deeply into politics, you are sure to get into theology.</q> On the
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
definition of theology, see Luthardt, Compendium der Dogmatik, 1:2; Blunt, Dict.
Doct. and Hist. Theol., art.: Theology; H. B. Smith, Introd. to Christ. Theol., 44; cf.
Aristotle, Metaph., 10, 7, 4; 11, 6, 4; and Lactantius, De Ira Dei, 11.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Aim of Theology.</head>

<p>
The aim of theology is the ascertainment of the facts respecting
God and the relations between God and the universe, and the exhibition
of these facts in their rational unity, as connected parts of a formulated
and organic system of truth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In defining theology as a science, we indicate its aim. Science does not create; it
discovers. Theology answers to this description of a science. It discovers facts and
relations, but it does not create them. Fisher, Nature and Method of Revelation, 141&mdash;<q>Schiller,
referring to the ardor of Columbus's faith, says that if the great discoverer
had not found a continent, he would have created one. But faith is not creative. Had
Columbus not found the land&mdash;had there been no real object answering to his belief&mdash;his
faith would have been a mere fancy.</q> Because theology deals with objective facts,
we refuse to define it as <q>the science of religion</q>; <hi rend='italic'>versus</hi> Am. Theol. Rev., 1850:101-126,
and Thornwell, Theology, 1:139. Both the facts and the relations with which theology
has to deal have an existence independent of the subjective mental processes of the
theologian.
</p>

<p>
Science is not only the observing, recording, verifying, and formulating of objective
facts; it is also the recognition and explication of the relations between these
facts, and the synthesis of both the facts and the rational principles which unite them
in a comprehensive, rightly proportioned, and organic system. Scattered bricks and
timbers are not a house; severed arms, legs, heads and trunks from a dissecting room
are not living men; and facts alone do not constitute science. Science = facts + relations;
Whewell, Hist. Inductive Sciences, I, Introd., 43&mdash;<q>There may be facts without
science, as in the knowledge of the common quarryman; there may be thought without
science, as in the early Greek philosophy.</q> A. MacDonald: <q>The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> method
is related to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a posteriori</foreign> as the sails to the ballast of the boat: the more philosophy
the better, provided there are a sufficient number of facts; otherwise, there is danger
of upsetting the craft.</q>
</p>

<p>
President Woodrow Wilson: <q><q>Give us the facts</q> is the sharp injunction of our age
to its historians ... But facts of themselves do not constitute the truth. The truth is
abstract, not concrete. It is the just idea, the right revelation, of what things mean.
It is evoked only by such arrangements and orderings of facts as suggest meanings.</q>
Dove, Logic of the Christian Faith, 14&mdash;<q>The pursuit of science is the pursuit of relations.</q>
Everett, Science of Thought, 3&mdash;<q>Logy</q> (<hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, in <q>theology</q>), from λόγος,
= word + reason, expression + thought, fact + idea; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>John 1:1&mdash;<q>In the beginning was the
Word.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
As theology deals with objective facts and their relations, so its arrangement of these
facts is not optional, but is determined by the nature of the material with which it deals.
A true theology thinks over again God's thoughts and brings them into God's order, as
the builders of Solomon's temple took the stones already hewn, and put them into the
places for which the architect had designed them; Reginald Heber: <q>No hammer fell,
no ponderous axes rung; Like some tall palm, the mystic fabric sprung.</q> Scientific
men have no fear that the data of physics will narrow or cramp their intellects; no
more should they fear the objective facts which are the data of theology. We cannot
make theology, any more than we can make a law of physical nature. As the natural
philosopher is <q>Naturæ minister et interpres,</q> so the theologian is the servant and
interpreter of the objective truth of God. On the Idea of Theology as a System, see
H. B. Smith, Faith and Philosophy, 126-166.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Possibility of Theology.</head>

<p>
The possibility of theology has a threefold ground:
1. In the existence of a God who has relations to the universe; 2. In the
capacity of the human mind for knowing God and certain of these relations;
and 3. In the provision of means by which God is brought into actual contact
with the mind, or in other words, in the provision of a revelation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Any particular science is possible only when three conditions combine, namely, the
actual existence of the object with which the science deals, the subjective capacity of
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
the human mind to know that object, and the provision of definite means by which the
object is brought into contact with the mind. We may illustrate the conditions of
theology from selenology&mdash;the science, not of <q>lunar politics,</q> which John Stuart Mill
thought so vain a pursuit, but of lunar physics. Selenology has three conditions: 1.
the objective existence of the moon; 2. the subjective capacity of the human mind to
know the moon; and 3. the provision of some means (<hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, the eye and the telescope)
by which the gulf between man and the moon is bridged over, and by which the mind
can come into actual cognizance of the facts with regard to the moon.
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. The existence of a God.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>In the existence of a God who has relations to the universe.</hi>&mdash;It has
been objected, indeed, that since God and these relations are objects
apprehended only by faith, they are not proper objects of knowledge or
subjects for science. We reply:
</p>

<p>
A. Faith is knowledge, and a higher sort of knowledge.&mdash;Physical science
also rests upon faith&mdash;faith in our own existence, in the existence of a
world objective and external to us, and in the existence of other persons
than ourselves; faith in our primitive convictions, such as space, time,
cause, substance, design, right; faith in the trustworthiness of our faculties
and in the testimony of our fellow men. But physical science is not thereby
invalidated, because this faith, though unlike sense-perception or logical
demonstration, is yet a cognitive act of the reason, and may be defined
as certitude with respect to matters in which verification is unattainable.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The objection to theology thus mentioned and answered is expressed in the words of
Sir William Hamilton, Metaphysics, 44, 531&mdash;<q>Faith&mdash;belief&mdash;is the organ by which we
apprehend what is beyond our knowledge.</q> But science is knowledge, and what is
beyond our knowledge cannot be matter for science. Pres. E. G. Robinson says well,
that knowledge and faith cannot be severed from one another, like bulkheads in a ship,
the first of which may be crushed in, while the second still keeps the vessel afloat. The
mind is one,&mdash;<q>it cannot be cut in two with a hatchet.</q> Faith is not antithetical to
knowledge,&mdash;it is rather a larger and more fundamental sort of knowledge. It is never
opposed to reason, but only to sight. Tennyson was wrong when he wrote: <q>We have
but faith: we cannot know; For knowledge is of things we see</q> (In Memoriam, Introduction).
This would make sensuous phenomena the only objects of knowledge. Faith
in supersensible realities, on the contrary, is the highest exercise of reason.
</p>

<p>
Sir William Hamilton consistently declares that the highest achievement of science
is the erection of an altar <q>To the Unknown God.</q> This, however, is not the representation
of Scripture. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <emph>John 17:3&mdash;<q>this is life eternal, that they should know thee, the only true God</q></emph>;
and <emph>Jer. 9:24&mdash;<q>let him that glorieth glory in that he hath understanding and knoweth me.</q></emph> For criticism
of Hamilton, see H. B. Smith, Faith and Philosophy, 297-336. Fichte: <q>We are born in
faith.</q> Even Goethe called himself a believer in the five senses. Balfour, Defence of
Philosophic Doubt, 277-295, shows that intuitive beliefs in space, time, cause, substance,
right, are presupposed in the acquisition of all other knowledge. Dove, Logic of the
Christian Faith, 14&mdash;<q>If theology is to be overthrown because it starts from some primary
terms and propositions, then all other sciences are overthrown with it.</q> Mozley,
Miracles, defines faith as <q>unverified reason.</q> See A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion,
19-30.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Faith is a knowledge conditioned by holy affection.&mdash;The faith which
apprehends God's being and working is not opinion or imagination. It is
certitude with regard to spiritual realities, upon the testimony of our
rational nature and upon the testimony of God. Its only peculiarity as a cognitive
act of the reason is that it is conditioned by holy affection. As the
science of æsthetics is a product of reason as including a power of recognizing
beauty practically inseparable from a love for beauty, and as the
science of ethics is a product of reason as including a power of recognizing
the morally right practically inseparable from a love for the morally right, so
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
the science of theology is a product of reason, but of reason as including
a power of recognizing God which is practically inseparable from a love for
God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We here use the term <q>reason</q> to signify the mind's whole power of knowing.
Reason in this sense includes states of the sensibility, so far as they are indispensable
to knowledge. We cannot know an orange by the eye alone; to the understanding of
it, taste is as necessary as sight. The mathematics of sound cannot give us an understanding
of music; we need also a musical ear. Logic alone cannot demonstrate the
beauty of a sunset, or of a noble character; love for the beautiful and the right precedes
knowledge of the beautiful and the right. Ullman draws attention to the derivation
of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sapientia</foreign>, wisdom, from <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sapĕre</foreign>, to taste. So we cannot know God by intellect
alone; the heart must go with the intellect to make knowledge of divine things possible.
<q>Human things,</q> said Pascal, <q>need only to be known, in order to be loved; but
divine things must first be loved, in order to be known.</q> <q>This [religious] faith of
the intellect,</q> said Kant, <q>is founded on the assumption of moral tempers.</q> If one
were utterly indifferent to moral laws, the philosopher continues, even then religious
truths <q>would be supported by strong arguments from analogy, but not by such as an
obstinate, sceptical heart might not overcome.</q>
</p>

<p>
Faith, then, is the highest knowledge, because it is the act of the integral soul, the
insight, not of one eye alone, but of the two eyes of the mind, intellect and love to God.
With one eye we can see an object as flat, but, if we wish to see around it and get the
stereoptic effect, we must use both eyes. It is not the theologian, but the undevout
astronomer, whose science is one-eyed and therefore incomplete. The errors of the
rationalist are errors of defective vision. Intellect has been divorced from heart, that
is, from a right disposition, right affections, right purpose in life. Intellect says: <q>I
cannot know God</q>; and intellect is right. What intellect says, the Scripture also says:
<emph>1 Cor. 2:14&mdash;<q>the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him; and he
cannot know them, because they are spiritually judged</q>; 1:21&mdash;<q>in the wisdom of God the world through its wisdom
knew not God.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
The Scripture on the other hand declares that <emph><q>by faith we know</q> (Heb. 11:3)</emph>. By <q>heart</q>
the Scripture means simply the governing disposition, or the sensibility + the will; and
it intimates that the heart is an organ of knowledge: <emph>Ex. 35:25&mdash;<q>the women that were wise-hearted</q></emph>;
<emph>Ps. 34:8&mdash;<q>O taste and see that Jehovah is good</q></emph> = a right taste precedes correct sight;
<emph>Jer. 24:7&mdash;<q>I will give them a heart to know me</q></emph>; <emph>Mat. 5:8&mdash;<q>Blessed are the pure in heart; for they shall see
God</q></emph>; <emph>Luke 24:25&mdash;<q>slow of heart to believe</q></emph>; <emph>John 7:17&mdash;<q>If any man willeth to do his will, he shall know of
the teaching, whether it is of God, or whether I speak from myself</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 1:18&mdash;<q>having the eyes of your heart
enlightened, that ye may know</q></emph>; <emph>1 John 4:7, 8&mdash;<q>Every one that loveth is begotten of God, and knoweth God. He
that loveth not knoweth not God.</q></emph> See Frank, Christian Certainty, 303-324; Clarke, Christ.
Theol., 362; Illingworth, Div. and Hum. Personality, 114-137; R. T. Smith, Man's Knowledge
of Man and of God, 6; Fisher, Nat. and Method of Rev., 6; William James, The
Will to Believe, 1-31; Geo. T. Ladd, on Lotze's view that love is essential to the
knowledge of God, in New World, Sept. 1895:401-406; Gunsaulus, Transfig. of Christ,
14, 15.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. Faith, therefore, can furnish, and only faith can furnish, fit and
sufficient material for a scientific theology.&mdash;As an operation of man's
higher rational nature, though distinct from ocular vision or from reasoning,
faith is not only a kind, but the highest kind, of knowing. It gives
us understanding of realities which to sense alone are inaccessible, namely,
God's existence, and some at least of the relations between God and his
creation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 1:50, follows Gerhard in making faith the joint act of intellect
and will. Hopkins, Outline Study of Man, 77, 78, speaks not only of <q>the æsthetic
reason</q> but of <q>the moral reason.</q> Murphy, Scientific Bases of Faith, 91, 109, 145, 191&mdash;<q>Faith
is the certitude concerning matter in which verification is unattainable.</q> Emerson,
Essays, 2:96&mdash;<q>Belief consists in accepting the affirmations of the soul&mdash;unbelief
in rejecting them.</q> Morell, Philos. of Religion, 38, 52, 53, quotes Coleridge: <q>Faith
consists in the synthesis of the reason and of the individual will, ... and by virtue
of the former (that is, reason), faith must be a light, a form of knowing, a beholding
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
of truth.</q> Faith, then, is not to be pictured as a blind girl clinging to a cross&mdash;faith
is not blind&mdash;<q>Else the cross may just as well be a crucifix or an image of Gaudama.</q>
<q>Blind unbelief,</q> not blind faith, <q>is sure to err, And scan his works in vain.</q> As
in conscience we recognize an invisible authority, and know the truth just in proportion
to our willingness to <q>do the truth,</q> so in religion only holiness can understand
holiness, and only love can understand love (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>John 3:21&mdash;<q>he that doeth the truth cometh to the
light</q></emph>).
</p>

<p>
If a right state of heart be indispensable to faith and so to the knowledge of God,
can there be any <q>theologia irregenitorum,</q> or theology of the unregenerate? Yes, we
answer; just as the blind man can have a science of optics. The testimony of others
gives it claims upon him; the dim light penetrating the obscuring membrane corroborates
this testimony. The unregenerate man can know God as power and justice,
and can fear him. But this is not a knowledge of God's inmost character; it furnishes
some material for a defective and ill-proportioned theology; but it does not furnish
fit or sufficient material for a correct theology. As, in order to make his science of
optics satisfactory and complete, the blind man must have the cataract removed from
his eyes by some competent oculist, so, in order to any complete or satisfactory theology,
the veil must be taken away from the heart by God himself (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>2 Cor. 3:15, 16</emph>&mdash;<q><emph>a
veil lieth upon their heart. But whensoever it</emph> [marg. <q>a man</q>] <emph>shall turn to the Lord, the veil is taken away</emph></q>).
</p>

<p>
Our doctrine that faith is knowledge and the highest knowledge is to be distinguished
from that of Ritschl, whose theology is an appeal to the heart to the <emph>exclusion</emph> of the
head&mdash;to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fiducia</foreign> without <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>notitia</foreign>. But <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fiducia</foreign> includes <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>notitia</foreign>, else it is blind, irrational,
and unscientific. Robert Browning, in like manner, fell into a deep speculative error,
when, in order to substantiate his optimistic faith, he stigmatized human knowledge
as merely apparent. The appeal of both Ritschl and Browning from the head to the
heart should rather be an appeal from the narrower knowledge of the mere
intellect to the larger knowledge conditioned upon right affection. See A. H.
Strong, The Great Poets and their Theology, 441. On Ritschl's postulates, see Stearns,
Evidence of Christian Experience, 274-280, and Pfleiderer, Die Ritschl'sche Theologie.
On the relation of love and will to knowledge, see Kaftan, in Am. Jour. Theology,
1900:717; Hovey, Manual Christ. Theol., 9; Foundations of our Faith, 12, 13; Shedd,
Hist. Doct., 1:154-164; Presb. Quar., Oct. 1871, Oct. 1872, Oct. 1873; Calderwood,
Philos. Infinite, 99, 117; Van Oosterzee, Dogmatics, 2-8; New Englander, July, 1873:481;
Princeton Rev., 1864:122; Christlieb, Mod. Doubt, 124, 125; Grau, Glaube als höchste
Vernunft, in Beweis des Glaubens, 1865:110; Dorner, Gesch. prot. Theol., 228;
Newman, Univ. Sermons, 206; Hinton, Art of Thinking, Introd. by Hodgson, 5.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Man's capacity for the knowledge of God</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>In the capacity of the human mind for knowing God and certain
of these relations.</hi>&mdash;But it has urged that such knowledge is impossible
for the following reasons:
</p>

<p>
A. Because we can know only phenomena. We reply: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) We know
mental as well as physical phenomena. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) In knowing phenomena,
whether mental or physical, we know substance as underlying the phenomena,
as manifested through them, and as constituting their ground of
unity. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Our minds bring to the observation of phenomena not only
this knowledge of substance, but also knowledge of time, space, cause, and
right, realities which are in no sense phenomenal. Since these objects of
knowledge are not phenomenal, the fact that God is not phenomenal cannot
prevent us from knowing him.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
What substance is, we need not here determine. Whether we are realists or idealists,
we are compelled to grant that there cannot be phenomena without noumena, cannot
be appearances without something that appears, cannot be qualities without something
that is qualified. This something which underlies or stands under appearance or quality
we call substance. We are Lotzeans rather than Kantians, in our philosophy. To
say that we know, not the self, but only its manifestations in thought, is to confound
self with its thinking and to teach psychology without a soul. To say that we know
no external world, but only its manifestations in sensations, is to ignore the principle
that binds these sensations together; for without a somewhat in which qualities inhere
they can have no ground of unity. In like manner, to say that we know nothing of
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
God but his manifestations, is to confound God with the world and practically to deny
that there is a God.
</p>

<p>
Stählin, in his work on Kant, Lotze and Ritschl, 186-191, 218, 219, says well that <q>limitation
of knowledge to phenomena involves the elimination from theology of all claim
to know the objects of the Christian faith as they are in themselves.</q> This criticism
justly classes Ritschl with Kant, rather than with Lotze who maintains that knowing
phenomena we know also the noumena manifested in them. While Ritschl professes
to follow Lotze, the whole drift of his theology is in the direction of the Kantian
identification of the world with our sensations, mind with our thoughts, and God with
such activities of his as we can perceive. A divine nature apart from its activities, a
preexistent Christ, an immanent Trinity, are practically denied. Assertions that God
is self-conscious love and fatherhood become judgments of merely subjective value.
On Ritschl, see the works of Orr, of Garvie, and of Swing; also Minton, in Pres. and
Ref. Rev., Jan. 1902:162-169, and C. W. Hodge, <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, Apl. 1902:321-326; Flint, Agnosticism,
590-597; Everett, Essays Theol. and Lit., 92-99.
</p>

<p>
We grant that we can know God only so far as his activities reveal him, and so far as
our minds and hearts are receptive of his revelation. The appropriate faculties must
be exercised&mdash;not the mathematical, the logical, or the prudential, but the ethical and
the religious. It is the merit of Ritschl that he recognizes the practical in distinction
from the speculative reason; his error is in not recognizing that, when we do thus use
the proper powers of knowing, we gain not merely subjective but also objective truth,
and come in contact not simply with God's activities but also with God himself. Normal
religious judgments, though dependent upon subjective conditions, are not simply
<q>judgments of worth</q> or <q>value-judgments,</q>&mdash;they give us the knowledge of <q>things
in themselves.</q> Edward Caird says of his brother John Caird (Fund. Ideas of Christianity,
Introd. cxxi)&mdash;<q>The conviction that God can be known and is known, and
that, in the deepest sense, all our knowledge is knowledge of him, was the corner-stone
of his theology.</q>
</p>

<p>
Ritschl's phenomenalism is allied to the positivism of Comte, who regarded all so-called
knowledge of other than phenomenal objects as purely negative. The phrase <q>Positive
Philosophy</q> implies indeed that all knowledge of mind is negative; see Comte,
Pos. Philosophy, Martineau's translation, 26, 28, 33&mdash;<q>In order to observe, your intellect
must pause from activity&mdash;yet it is this very activity you want to observe. If you
cannot effect the pause, you cannot observe; if you do effect it, there is nothing to
observe.</q> This view is refuted by the two facts; (1) consciousness, and (2) memory;
for consciousness is the knowing of the self side by side with the knowing of its
thoughts, and memory is the knowing of the self side by side with the knowing of its
past; see Martineau, Essays Philos. and Theol., 1:24-40, 207-212. By phenomena we
mean <q>facts, in distinction from their ground, principle, or law</q>; <q>neither phenomena
nor qualities, as such, are perceived, but objects, percepts, or beings; and it is
by an after-thought or reflex process that these are connected as qualities and are
referred to as substances</q>; see Porter, Human Intellect, 51, 238, 520, 619-637, 640-645.
</p>

<p>
Phenomena may be internal, <hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, thoughts; in this case the noumenon is the mind, of
which these thoughts are the manifestations. Or, phenomena may be external, <hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>,
color, hardness, shape, size; in this case the noumenon is matter, of which these qualities
are the manifestations. But qualities, whether mental or material, imply the existence
of a substance to which they belong: they can no more be conceived of as existing
apart from substance, than the upper side of a plank can be conceived of as existing
without an under side; see Bowne, Review of Herbert Spencer, 47, 207-217; Martineau,
Types of Ethical Theory, 1; 455, 456&mdash;<q>Comte's assumption that mind cannot know
itself or its states is exactly balanced by Kant's assumption that mind cannot know
anything outside of itself.... It is precisely because all knowledge is of relations
that it is not and cannot be of phenomena alone. The absolute cannot <hi rend='italic'>per se</hi> be
known, because in being known it would <hi rend='italic'>ipso facto</hi> enter into relations and be absolute
no more. But neither can the phenomenal <hi rend='italic'>per se</hi> be known, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, be known as
phenomenal, without simultaneous cognition of what is non-phenomenal.</q> McCosh,
Intuitions, 138-154, states the characteristics of substance as (1) being, (2) power, (3)
permanence. Diman, Theistic Argument, 337, 363&mdash;<q>The theory that disproves God,
disproves an external world and the existence of the soul.</q> We know something beyond
phenomena, viz.: law, cause, force,&mdash;or we can have no science; see Tulloch, on Comte,
in Modern Theories, 53-73; see also Bib. Sac., 1874:211; Alden, Philosophy, 44; Hopkins,
Outline Study of Man, 87; Fleming, Vocab. of Philosophy, art.: Phenomena;
New Englander, July, 1875:537-539.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>

<p>
B. Because we can know only that which bears analogy to our own
nature or experience. We reply: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It is not essential to knowledge
that there be similarity of nature between the knower and the known.
We know by difference as well as by likeness. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Our past experience,
though greatly facilitating new acquisitions, is not the measure of our possible
knowledge. Else the first act of knowledge would be inexplicable,
and all revelation of higher characters to lower would be precluded, as well
as all progress to knowledge which surpasses our present attainments.
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Even if knowledge depended upon similarity of nature and experience,
we might still know God, since we are made in God's image, and there
are important analogies between the divine nature and our own.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The dictum of Empedocles, <q>Similia similibus percipiuntur,</q> must be supplemented
by a second dictum, <q>Similia dissimilibus percipiuntur.</q> All things are alike,
in being objects. But knowing is distinguishing, and there must be contrast
between objects to awaken our attention. God knows sin, though it is the antithesis
to his holy being. The ego knows the non-ego. We cannot know even self, without
objectifying it, distinguishing it from its thoughts, and regarding it as another.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Versus</hi> Herbert Spencer, First Principles, 79-82&mdash;<q>Knowledge is recognition and
classification.</q> But we reply that a thing must first be perceived in order to be recognized
or compared with something else; and this is as true of the first sensation as of
the later and more definite forms of knowledge,&mdash;indeed there is no sensation which
does not involve, as its complement, an at least incipient perception; see Sir William
Hamilton, Metaphysics, 351, 352; Porter, Human Intellect, 206.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Porter, Human Intellect, 486&mdash;<q>Induction is possible only upon the assumption
that the intellect of man is a reflex of the divine intellect, or that man is made in the
image of God.</q> Note, however, that man is made in God's image, not God in man's.
The painting is the image of the landscape, not, <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>, the landscape the image of
the painting; for there is much in the landscape that has nothing corresponding to
it in the painting. Idolatry perversely makes God in the image of man, and so deifies
man's weakness and impurity. Trinity in God may have no exact counterpart in man's
present constitution, though it may disclose to us the goal of man's future development
and the meaning of the increasing differentiation of man's powers. Gore, Incarnation,
116&mdash;<q>If anthropomorphism as applied to God is false, yet theomorphism as
applied to man is true; man is made in God's image, and his qualities are, not the measure
of the divine, but their counterpart and real expression.</q> See Murphy, Scientific
Bases, 122; McCosh, in Internat. Rev., 1875:105; Bib. Sac., 1867:624; Martineau,
Types of Ethical Theory, 2:4-8, and Study of Religion, 1:94.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. Because we know only that of which we can conceive, in the sense
of forming an adequate mental image. We reply: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It is true that
we know only that of which we can conceive, if by the term <q>conceive</q>
we mean our distinguishing in thought the object known from all other
objects. But, (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The objection confounds conception with that which is
merely its occasional accompaniment and help, namely, the picturing of
the object by the imagination. In this sense, conceivability is not a final
test of truth. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That the formation of a mental image is not essential
to conception or knowledge, is plain when we remember that, as a matter
of fact, we both conceive and know many things of which we cannot form
a mental image of any sort that in the least corresponds to the reality; for
example, force, cause, law, space, our own minds. So we may know God,
though we cannot form an adequate mental image of him.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The objection here refuted is expressed most clearly in the words of Herbert Spencer,
First Principles, 25-36, 98&mdash;<q>The reality underlying appearances is totally and forever
inconceivable by us.</q> Mansel, Prolegomena Logica, 77, 78 (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> 26) suggests the
source of this error in a wrong view of the nature of the concept: <q>The first distinguishing
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
feature of a concept, viz.: that it cannot in itself be depicted to sense or
imagination.</q> Porter, Human Intellect, 392 (see also 429, 656)&mdash;<q>The <emph>concept</emph> is not a
mental image</q>&mdash;only the <emph>percept</emph> is. Lotze: <q>Color in general is not representable by
any image; it looks neither green nor red, but has no look whatever.</q> The generic
horse has no particular color, though the individual horse may be black, white, or
bay. So Sir William Hamilton speaks of <q>the unpicturable notions of the intelligence.</q>
</p>

<p>
Martineau, Religion and Materialism, 39, 40&mdash;<q>This doctrine of Nescience stands in
exactly the same relation to causal power, whether you construe it as Material Force
or as Divine Agency. Neither can be <emph>observed</emph>; one or the other must be <emph>assumed</emph>. If
you admit to the category of knowledge only what we learn from observation, particular
or generalized, then is Force unknown; if you extend the word to what is
imported by the intellect itself into our cognitive acts, to make them such, then is
God known.</q> Matter, ether, energy, protoplasm, organism, life,&mdash;no one of these can
be portrayed to the imagination; yet Mr. Spencer deals with them as objects of
Science. If these are not inscrutable, why should he regard the Power that gives
unity to all things as inscrutable?
</p>

<p>
Herbert Spencer is not in fact consistent with himself, for in divers parts of his writings
he calls the inscrutable Reality back of phenomena the one, eternal, ubiquitous,
infinite, ultimate, absolute Existence, Power and Cause. <q>It seems,</q> says Father Dalgairns,
<q>that a great deal is known about the Unknowable.</q> Chadwick, Unitarianism,
75&mdash;<q>The beggar phrase <q>Unknowable</q> becomes, after Spencer's repeated designations
of it, as rich as Croesus with all saving knowledge.</q> Matheson: <q>To know that we
know nothing is already to have reached a fact of knowledge.</q> If Mr. Spencer
intended to exclude God from the realm of Knowledge, he should first have excluded
him from the realm of Existence; for to grant that he is, is already to grant that we
not only may know him, but that we actually to some extent do know him; see D. J.
Hill, Genetic Philosophy, 22; McCosh, Intuitions, 186-189 (Eng. ed., 214); Murphy, Scientific
Bases, 133; Bowne, Review of Spencer, 30-34; New Englander, July, 1875:543, 544;
Oscar Craig, in Presb. Rev., July, 1883:594-602.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
D. Because we can know truly only that which we know in whole and
not in part. We reply: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The objection confounds partial knowledge
with the knowledge of a part. We know the mind in part, but we do
not know a part of the mind. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) If the objection were valid, no real
knowledge of anything would be possible, since we know no single thing
in all its relations. We conclude that, although God is a being not composed
of parts, we may yet have a partial knowledge of him, and this
knowledge, though not exhaustive, may yet be real, and adequate to the
purposes of science.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The objection mentioned in the text is urged by Mansel, Limits of Religious
Thought, 97, 98, and is answered by Martineau, Essays, 1:291. The mind does not exist
in space, and it has no parts: we cannot speak of its south-west corner, nor can we
divide it into halves. Yet we find the material for mental science in partial knowledge
of the mind. So, while we are not <q>geographers of the divine nature</q> (Bowne, Review
of Spencer, 72), we may say with Paul, not <q>now know we a part of God,</q> but <emph><q>now I
know [God], in part</q> (1 Cor. 13:12)</emph>. We may know truly what we do not know exhaustively;
see <emph>Eph. 3:19&mdash;<q>to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge.</q></emph> I do not perfectly understand
myself, yet I know myself in part; so I may know God, though I do not perfectly
understand him.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The same argument that proves God unknowable proves the universe unknowable
also. Since every particle of matter in the universe attracts every other, no one
particle can be exhaustively explained without taking account of all the rest. Thomas
Carlyle: <q>It is a mathematical fact that the casting of this pebble from my hand
alters the centre of gravity of the universe.</q> Tennyson, Higher Pantheism: <q>Flower
in the crannied wall, I pluck you out of the crannies; Hold you here, root and all, in
my hand, Little flower; but if I could understand What you are, root and all, and
all in all, I should know what God and man is.</q> Schurman, Agnosticism, 119&mdash;<q>Partial
as it is, this vision of the divine transfigures the life of man on earth.</q> Pfleiderer, Philos.
Religion, 1:167&mdash;<q>A faint-hearted agnosticism is worse than the arrogant and
titanic gnosticism against which it protests.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<p>
E. Because all predicates of God are negative, and therefore furnish
no real knowledge. We answer: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Predicates derived from our consciousness,
such as spirit, love, and holiness, are positive. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The terms
<q>infinite</q> and <q>absolute,</q> moreover, express not merely a negative but a
positive idea&mdash;the idea, in the former case, of the absence of all limit, the
idea that the object thus described goes on and on forever; the idea, in
the latter case, of entire self-sufficiency. Since predicates of God, therefore,
are not merely negative, the argument mentioned above furnishes no
valid reason why we may not know him.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Versus</hi> Sir William Hamilton, Metaphysics, 530&mdash;<q>The absolute and the infinite can
each only be conceived as a negation of the thinkable; in other words, of the absolute
and infinite we have no conception at all.</q> Hamilton here confounds the infinite, or
the absence of <emph>all</emph> limits, with the indefinite, or the absence of all <emph>known</emph> limits. <hi rend='italic'>Per
contra</hi>, see Calderwood, Moral Philosophy, 248, and Philosophy of the Infinite, 272&mdash;<q>Negation
of one thing is possible only by affirmation of another.</q> Porter, Human
Intellect, 652&mdash;<q>If the Sandwich Islanders, for lack of name, had called the ox a <emph>not-hog</emph>,
the use of a negative appellation would not necessarily authorize the inference
of a want of definite conceptions or positive knowledge.</q> So with the infinite or not-finite,
the unconditioned or not-conditioned, the independent or not-dependent,&mdash;these
names do not imply that we cannot conceive and know it as something positive.
Spencer, First Principles, 92&mdash;<q>Our consciousness of the Absolute, indefinite though
it is, is positive, and not negative.</q>
</p>

<p>
Schurman, Agnosticism, 100, speaks of <q>the farce of nescience playing at omniscience
in setting the bounds of science.</q> <q>The agnostic,</q> he says, <q>sets up the invisible picture
of a <foreign rend='italic'>Grand Être</foreign>, formless and colorless in itself, absolutely separated from man and
from the world&mdash;blank within and void without&mdash;its very existence indistinguishable
from its non-existence, and, bowing down before this idolatrous creation, he
pours out his soul in lamentations over the incognizableness of such a mysterious and
awful non-entity.... The truth is that the agnostic's abstraction of a Deity is
unknown, only because it is unreal.</q> See McCosh, Intuitions, 194, note; Mivart, Lessons
from Nature, 363. God is not necessarily infinite in every respect. He is infinite only
in every excellence. A plane which is unlimited in the one respect of length may be
limited in another respect, such as breadth. Our doctrine here is not therefore inconsistent
with what immediately follows.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
F. Because to know is to limit or define. Hence the Absolute as
unlimited, and the Infinite as undefined, cannot be known. We answer:
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) God is absolute, not as existing in <emph>no</emph> relation, but as existing in no
<emph>necessary</emph> relation; and (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) God is infinite, not as excluding all coexistence
of the finite with himself, but as being the ground of the finite, and so
unfettered by it. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) God is actually limited by the unchangeableness of his
own attributes and personal distinctions, as well as by his self-chosen
relations to the universe he has created and to humanity in the person of
Christ. God is therefore limited and defined in such a sense as to render
knowledge of him possible.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Versus</hi> Mansel, Limitations of Religious Thought, 75-84, 93-95; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Spinoza: <q>Omnis
determinatio est negatio;</q> hence to define God is to deny him. But we reply that
perfection is inseparable from limitation. Man can be other than he is: not so God,
at least internally. But this limitation, inherent in his unchangeable attributes and
personal distinctions, is God's perfection. Externally, all limitations upon God are
self-limitations, and so are consistent with his perfection. That God should not be
able thus to limit himself in creation and redemption would render all self-sacrifice in
him impossible, and so would subject him to the greatest of limitations. We may say
therefore that God's 1. <hi rend='italic'>Perfection</hi> involves his limitation to (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) personality, (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) trinity,
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) righteousness; 2. <hi rend='italic'>Revelation</hi> involves his self-limitation in (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) decree, (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) creation,
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) preservation, (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) government, (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) education of the world; 3. <hi rend='italic'>Redemption</hi> involves
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
his infinite self-limitation in the (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) person and (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) work of Jesus Christ; see A. H.
Strong, Christ in Creation, 87-101, and in Bap. Quar. Rev., Jan. 1891:521-532.
</p>

<p>
Bowne, Philos. of Theism, 135&mdash;<q>The infinite is not the quantitative all; the absolute
is not the unrelated.... Both absolute and infinite mean only the independent ground
of things.</q> Julius Müller, Doct. Sin, Introduc., 10&mdash;<q>Religion has to do, not with <emph>an</emph>
Object that must let itself be known because its very existence is contingent upon its
being known, but with <emph>the</emph> Object in relation to whom we are truly subject, dependent
upon him, and waiting until he manifest himself.</q> James Martineau, Study of Religion,
1:346&mdash;<q>We must not confound the <emph>infinite</emph> with the <emph>total</emph>.... The self-abnegation
of infinity is but a form of self-assertion, and the only form in which it can reveal
itself.... However instantaneous the omniscient thought, however sure the
almighty power, the execution has to be distributed in time, and must have an order
of successive steps; on no other terms can the eternal become temporal, and the infinite
articulately speak in the finite.</q>
</p>

<p>
Perfect personality excludes, not <emph>self</emph>-determination, but determination <emph>from without</emph>,
determination <emph>by another</emph>. God's self-limitations are the self-limitations of love,
and therefore the evidences of his perfection. They are signs, not of weakness but of
power. God has limited himself to the method of evolution, gradually unfolding himself
in nature and in history. The government of sinners by a holy God involves constant
self-repression. The education of the race is a long process of divine forbearance;
Herder: <q>The limitations of the pupil are limitations of the teacher also.</q> In
inspiration, God limits himself by the human element through which he works.
Above all, in the person and work of Christ, we have infinite self-limitation: Infinity
narrows itself down to a point in the incarnation, and holiness endures the agonies of
the Cross. God's promises are also self-limitations. Thus both nature and grace are
self-imposed restrictions upon God, and these self-limitations are the means by which
he reveals himself. See Pfleiderer, Die Religion, 1:189, 195; Porter, Human Intellect,
653; Murphy, Scientific Bases, 130; Calderwood, Philos. Infinite, 168; McCosh, Intuitions,
186; Hickok, Rational Cosmology, 85; Martineau, Study of Religion, 2:85, 86, 362;
Shedd, Dogmatic Theology, 1:189-191.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
G. Because all knowledge is relative to the knowing agent; that is,
what we know, we know, not as it is objectively, but only as it is related
to our own senses and faculties. In reply: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) We grant that we can
know only that which has relation to our faculties. But this is simply to
say that we know only that which we come into mental contact with, that
is, we know only what we know. But, (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) We deny that what we come
into mental contact with is known by us as other than it is. So far as it is
known at all, it is known as it is. In other words, the laws of our knowing
are not merely arbitrary and regulative, but correspond to the nature of
things. We conclude that, in theology, we are equally warranted in
assuming that the laws of our thought are laws of God's thought, and that
the results of normally conducted thinking with regard to God correspond
to the objective reality.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Versus</hi> Sir Wm. Hamilton, Metaph., 96-116, and Herbert Spencer, First Principles,
68-97. This doctrine of relativity is derived from Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, who
holds that <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> judgments are simply <q>regulative.</q> But we reply that when our
primitive beliefs are found to be simply regulative, they will cease to regulate.
The forms of thought are also facts of nature. The mind does not, like the glass of a
kaleidoscope, itself furnish the forms; it recognizes these as having an existence external
to itself. The mind reads its ideas, not <emph>into</emph> nature, but <emph>in</emph> nature. Our intuitions
are not green goggles, which make all the world <emph>seem</emph> green: they are the lenses of a
microscope, which enable us to see what is objectively <emph>real</emph> (Royce, Spirit of Mod.
Philos., 125). Kant called our understanding <q>the legislator of nature.</q> But it is so,
only as discoverer of nature's laws, not as creator of them. Human reason does
impose its laws and forms upon the universe; but, in doing this, it interprets the real
meaning of the universe.
</p>

<p>
Ladd, Philos. of Knowledge: <q>All judgment implies an objective truth according
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
to which we judge, which constitutes the standard, and with which we have something
in common, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, our minds are part of an infinite and eternal Mind.</q> French
aphorism: <q>When you are right, you are more right than you think you are.</q> God
will not put us to permanent intellectual confusion. Kant vainly wrote <q>No
thoroughfare</q> over the reason in its highest exercise. Martineau, Study of Religion,
1:135, 136&mdash;<q>Over against Kant's assumption that the mind cannot know anything outside
of itself, we may set Comte's equally unwarrantable assumption that the mind
cannot know itself or its states. We cannot have philosophy without assumptions.
You dogmatize if you say that the forms correspond with reality; but you equally
dogmatize if you say that they do not.... 79&mdash;That our cognitive faculties correspond
to things <emph>as they are</emph>, is much less surprising than that they should correspond to
things <emph>as they are not</emph>.</q> W. T. Harris, in Journ. Spec. Philos., 1:22, exposes Herbert
Spencer's self-contradiction: <q>All knowledge is, not absolute, but relative; our
knowledge of this fact however is, not relative, but absolute.</q>
</p>

<p>
Ritschl, Justification and Reconciliation, 3:16-21, sets out with a correct statement
of the nature of knowledge, and gives in his adhesion to the doctrine of Lotze, as distinguished
from that of Kant. Ritschl's statement may be summarized as follows:
<q>We deal, not with the abstract God of metaphysics, but with the God self-limited,
who is revealed in Christ. We do not know either things or God <emph>apart from</emph> their
phenomena or manifestations, as Plato imagined; we do not know phenomena or manifestations
<emph>alone</emph>, without knowing either things or God, as Kant supposed; but we do
know both things and God <emph>in</emph> their phenomena or manifestations, as Lotze taught.
We hold to no mystical union with God, back of all experience in religion, as Pietism
does; soul is always and only active, and religion is the activity of the human spirit, in
which feeling, knowing and willing combine in an intelligible order.</q>
</p>

<p>
But Dr. C. M. Mead, Ritschl's Place in the History of Doctrine, has well shown that
Ritschl has not followed Lotze. His <q>value-judgments</q> are simply an application to
theology of the <q>regulative</q> principle of Kant. He holds that we can know things
not as they are in themselves, but only as they are for us. We reply that what things
are worth for us depends on what they are in themselves. Ritschl regards the doctrines
of Christ's preexistence, divinity and atonement as intrusions of metaphysics
into theology, matters about which we cannot know, and with which we have nothing
to do. There is no propitiation or mystical union with Christ; and Christ is our
Example, but not our atoning Savior. Ritschl does well in recognizing that love in
us gives eyes to the mind, and enables us to see the beauty of Christ and his truth.
But our judgment is not, as he holds, a merely subjective value-judgment,&mdash;it is a
coming in contact with objective fact. On the theory of knowledge held by Kant,
Hamilton and Spencer, see Bishop Temple, Bampton Lectures for 1884:13; H. B.
Smith, Faith and Philosophy, 297-336; J. S. Mill, Examination, 1:113-134; Herbert,
Modern Realism Examined; M. B. Anderson, art.: <q>Hamilton,</q> in Johnson's Encyclopædia;
McCosh, Intuitions, 139-146, 340, 341, and Christianity and Positivism, 97-123;
Maurice, What is Revelation? Alden, Intellectual Philosophy, 48-79, esp. 71-79; Porter,
Hum. Intellect, 523; Murphy, Scientific Bases, 103; Bib. Sac. April, 1868:341;
Princeton Rev., 1864:122; Bowne, Review of Herbert Spencer, 76; Bowen, in Princeton
Rev., March, 1878:445-448; Mind, April, 1878:257; Carpenter, Mental Physiology,
117; Harris, Philos. Basis of Theism, 109-113; Iverach, in Present Day Tracts, 5: No. 29;
Martineau, Study of Religion, 1:79, 120, 121, 135, 136.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. God's revelation of himself to man.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>In God's actual revelation of himself and certain of these relations.</hi>&mdash;As
we do not in this place attempt a positive proof of God's existence
or of man's capacity for the knowledge of God, so we do not now
attempt to prove that God has brought himself into contact with man's
mind by revelation. We shall consider the grounds of this belief hereafter.
Our aim at present is simply to show that, granting the fact of
revelation, a scientific theology is possible. This has been denied upon
the following grounds:
</p>

<p>
A. That revelation, as a making known, is necessarily internal and
subjective&mdash;either a mode of intelligence, or a quickening of man's cognitive
powers&mdash;and hence can furnish no objective facts such as constitute
the proper material for science.
</p>

<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Morell, Philos. Religion, 128-131, 143&mdash;<q>The Bible cannot in strict accuracy of language
be called a revelation, since a revelation always implies an actual process of
intelligence in a living mind.</q> F. W. Newman, Phases of Faith, 152&mdash;<q>Of our moral
and spiritual God we know nothing without&mdash;everything within.</q> Theodore Parker:
<q>Verbal revelation can never communicate a simple idea like that of God, Justice,
Love, Religion</q>; see review of Parker in Bib. Sac., 18:24-27. James Martineau, Seat
of Authority in Religion: <q>As many minds as there are that know God at first hand,
so many revealing acts there have been, and as many as know him at second hand are
strangers to revelation</q>; so, assuming external revelation to be impossible, Martineau
subjects all the proofs of such revelation to unfair destructive criticism. Pfleiderer,
Philos. Religion, 1:185&mdash;<q>As all revelation is originally an <emph>inner</emph> living experience,
the springing up of religious truth in the heart, no external event can belong in itself
to revelation, no matter whether it be naturally or supernaturally brought about.</q>
Professor George M. Forbes: <q>Nothing can be revealed to us which we do not grasp
with our reason. It follows that, so far as reason acts normally, it is a part of revelation.</q>
Ritchie, Darwin and Hegel, 30&mdash;<q>The revelation of God is the growth of the
idea of God.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In reply to this objection, urged mainly by idealists in philosophy,
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) We grant that revelation, to be effective, must be the means of
inducing a new mode of intelligence, or in other words, must be understood.
We grant that this understanding of divine things is impossible
without a quickening of man's cognitive powers. We grant, moreover,
that revelation, when originally imparted, was often internal and
subjective.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Matheson, Moments on the Mount, 51-53, on <emph>Gal. 1:16&mdash;<q>to reveal his Son in me</q></emph>: <q>The
revelation on the way to Damascus would not have enlightened Paul, had it been
merely a vision to his eye. Nothing can be revealed <emph>to</emph> us which has not been revealed
<emph>in</emph> us. The eye does not see the beauty of the landscape, nor the ear hear the beauty
of music. So flesh and blood do not reveal Christ to us. Without the teaching of
the Spirit, the external facts will be only like the letters of a book to a child that cannot
read.</q> We may say with Channing: <q>I am more sure that my rational nature is
from God, than that any book is the expression of his will.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) But we deny that external revelation is therefore useless or impossible.
Even if religious ideas sprang wholly from within, an external revelation
might stir up the dormant powers of the mind. Religious ideas,
however, do not spring wholly from within. External revelation can
impart them. Man can reveal himself to man by external communications,
and, if God has equal power with man, God can reveal himself to
man in like manner.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Rogers, in his Eclipse of Faith, asks pointedly: <q>If Messrs. Morell and Newman
can teach by a book, cannot God do the same?</q> Lotze, Microcosmos, 2:660 (book 9,
chap. 4), speaks of revelation as <q>either contained in some divine act of historic
occurrence, or continually repeated in men's hearts.</q> But in fact there is no alternative
here; the strength of the Christian creed is that God's revelation is both
external and internal; see Gore, in Lux Mundi, 338. Rainy, in Critical Review, 1:1-21,
well says that Martineau unwarrantably <emph>isolates</emph> the witness of God to the individual
soul. The inward needs to be combined with the outward, in order to make sure that
it is not a vagary of the imagination. We need to distinguish God's revelations from
our own fancies. Hence, before giving the internal, God commonly gives us the
external, as a standard by which to try our impressions. We are finite and sinful,
and we need authority. The external revelation commends itself as authoritative to
the heart which recognizes its own spiritual needs. External authority evokes the
inward witness and gives added clearness to it, but only historical revelation furnishes
indubitable proof that God is love, and gives us assurance that our longings after
God are not in vain.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Hence God's revelation may be, and, as we shall hereafter see, it is,
in great part, an external revelation in works and words. The universe is
a revelation of God; God's works in nature precede God's words in history.
We claim, moreover, that, in many cases where truth was originally communicated
internally, the same Spirit who communicated it has brought
about an external record of it, so that the internal revelation might be
handed down to others than those who first received it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We must not limit revelation to the Scriptures. The eternal Word antedated the written
word, and through the eternal Word God is made known in nature and in history. Internal
revelation is preceded by, and conditioned upon, external revelation. In point of
time earth comes before man, and sensation before perception. Action best expresses
character, and historic revelation is more by deeds than by words. Dorner, Hist. Prot.
Theol., 1:231-264&mdash;<q>The Word is not in the Scriptures alone. The whole creation
reveals the Word. In nature God shows his power; in incarnation his grace and truth.
Scripture testifies of these, but Scripture is not the essential Word. The Scripture
is truly apprehended and appropriated when in it and through it we see the living and
present Christ. It does not bind men to itself alone, but it points them to the Christ
of whom it testifies. Christ is the authority. In the Scriptures he points us to himself
and demands our faith in him. This faith, once begotten, leads us to new appropriation
of Scripture, but also to new criticism of Scripture. We find Christ more
and more in Scripture, and yet we judge Scripture more and more by the standard
which we find in Christ.</q>
</p>

<p>
Newman Smyth, Christian Ethics, 71-82: <q>There is but one authority&mdash;Christ. His
Spirit works in many ways, but chiefly in two: first, the inspiration of the Scriptures,
and, secondly, the leading of the church into the truth. The latter is not to be isolated
or separated from the former. Scripture is law to the Christian consciousness, and
Christian consciousness in time becomes law to the Scripture&mdash;interpreting, criticizing,
verifying it. The word and the spirit answer to each other. Scripture and faith are coördinate.
Protestantism has exaggerated the first; Romanism the second. Martineau
fails to grasp the coördination of Scripture and faith.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) With this external record we shall also see that there is given
under proper conditions a special influence of God's Spirit, so to quicken
our cognitive powers that the external record reproduces in our minds the
ideas with which the minds of the writers were at first divinely filled.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We may illustrate the need of internal revelation from Egyptology, which is impossible
so long as the external revelation in the hieroglyphics is uninterpreted; from the
ticking of the clock in a dark room, where only the lit candle enables us to tell the time;
from the landscape spread out around the Rigi in Switzerland, invisible until the first
rays of the sun touch the snowy mountain peaks. External revelation (φανέρωσις, <emph>Rom. 1:19,
20</emph>) must be supplemented by internal revelation (ἀποκάλυψις, <emph>1 Cor. 2:10, 12</emph>). Christ is the
organ of external, the Holy Spirit the organ of internal, revelation. In Christ (<emph>2 Cor. 1:20</emph>)
are <emph><q>the yea</q></emph> and <emph><q>the Amen</q></emph>&mdash;the objective certainty and the subjective certitude,
the reality and the realization.
</p>

<p>
Objective certainty must become subjective certitude in order to be a scientific
theology. Before conversion we have the first, the external truth of Christ; only at conversion
and after conversion do we have the second, <emph><q>Christ formed in us</q> (Gal. 4:19)</emph>. We have
objective revelation at Sinai (<emph>Ex. 20:22</emph>); subjective revelation in Elisha's knowledge of
Gehazi (<emph>2 K. 5:26</emph>). James Russell Lowell, Winter Evening Hymn to my Fire: <q>Therefore
with thee I love to read Our brave old poets: at thy touch how stirs Life in the
withered words! how swift recede Time's shadows! and how glows again Through its
dead mass the incandescent verse, As when upon the anvil of the brain It glittering
lay, cyclopically wrought By the fast throbbing hammers of the poet's thought!</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) Internal revelations thus recorded, and external revelations thus
interpreted, both furnish objective facts which may serve as proper material
for science. Although revelation in its widest sense may include, and
as constituting the ground of the possibility of theology does include, both
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
insight and illumination, it may also be used to denote simply a provision
of the external means of knowledge, and theology has to do with
inward revelations only as they are expressed in, or as they agree with,
this objective standard.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We have here suggested the vast scope and yet the insuperable limitations of theology.
So far as God is revealed, whether in nature, history, conscience, or Scripture,
theology may find material for its structure. Since Christ is not simply the incarnate
Son of God but also the eternal Word, the only Revealer of God, there is no theology
apart from Christ, and all theology is Christian theology. Nature and history are but
the dimmer and more general disclosures of the divine Being, of which the Cross is
the culmination and the key. God does not intentionally conceal himself. He wishes
to be known. He reveals himself at all times just as fully as the capacity of his creatures
will permit. The infantile intellect cannot understand God's boundlessness, nor
can the perverse disposition understand God's disinterested affection. Yet all truth is
in Christ and is open to discovery by the prepared mind and heart.
</p>

<p>
The Infinite One, so far as he is unrevealed, is certainly unknowable to the finite. But
the Infinite One, so far as he manifests himself, is knowable. This suggests the meaning
of the declarations: <emph>John 1:18&mdash;<q>No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, who is in
the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him</q></emph>; <emph>14:9&mdash;<q>he that hath seen me hath seen the Father</q></emph>; <emph>1 Tim. 6:16&mdash;<q>whom
no man hath seen, nor can see.</q></emph> We therefore approve of the definition of Kaftan,
Dogmatik, 1&mdash;<q>Dogmatics is the science of the Christian truth which is believed and
acknowledged in the church upon the ground of the divine revelation</q>&mdash;in so far as it
limits the scope of theology to truth revealed by God and apprehended by faith. But
theology presupposes both God's external and God's internal revelations, and these, as
we shall see, include nature, history, conscience and Scripture. On the whole subject,
see Kahnis, Dogmatik, 3:37-43; Nitzsch, System Christ. Doct., 72; Luthardt, Fund.
Truths, 193; Auberlen, Div. Rev., Introd., 29; Martineau, Essays, 1:171, 280; Bib. Sac.,
1867:593, and 1872:428; Porter, Human Intellect, 373-375; C. M. Mead, in Boston Lectures,
1871:58.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. That many of the truths thus revealed are too indefinite to constitute
the material for science, because they belong to the region of the feelings,
because they are beyond our full understanding, or because they are
destitute of orderly arrangement.
</p>

<p>
We reply:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Theology has to do with subjective feelings only as they can be
defined, and shown to be effects of objective truth upon the mind. They
are not more obscure than are the facts of morals or of psychology, and the
same objection which would exclude such feelings from theology would
make these latter sciences impossible.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See Jacobi and Schleiermacher, who regard theology as a mere account of devout
Christian feelings, the grounding of which in objective historical facts is a matter of
comparative indifference (Hagenbach, Hist. Doctrine, 2:401-403). Schleiermacher
therefore called his system of theology <q>Der Christliche Glaube,</q> and many since his
time have called their systems by the name of <q>Glaubenslehre.</q> Ritschl's <q>value-judgments,</q>
in like manner, render theology a merely subjective science, if any
subjective science is possible. Kaftan improves upon Ritschl, by granting that we
know, not only Christian feelings, but also Christian facts. Theology is the science of
God, and not simply the science of faith. Allied to the view already mentioned is that
of Feuerbach, to whom religion is a matter of subjective fancy; and that of Tyndall,
who would remit theology to the region of vague feeling and aspiration, but would
exclude it from the realm of science; see Feuerbach, Essence of Christianity, translated
by Marian Evans (George Eliot); also Tyndall, Belfast Address.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Those facts of revelation which are beyond our full understanding may,
like the nebular hypothesis in astronomy, the atomic theory in chemistry,
or the doctrine of evolution in biology, furnish a principle of union between
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
great classes of other facts otherwise irreconcilable. We may define our
concepts of God, and even of the Trinity, at least sufficiently to distinguish
them from all other concepts; and whatever difficulty may encumber the
putting of them into language only shows the importance of attempting it
and the value of even an approximate success.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Horace Bushnell: <q>Theology can never be a science, on account of the infirmities of
language.</q> But this principle would render void both ethical and political science.
Fisher, Nat. and Meth. of Revelation, 145&mdash;<q>Hume and Gibbon refer to faith as something
too sacred to rest on proof. Thus religious beliefs are made to hang in mid-air,
without any support. But the foundation of these beliefs is no less solid for the reason
that empirical tests are not applicable to them. The data on which they rest are real,
and the inferences from the data are fairly drawn.</q> Hodgson indeed pours contempt
on the whole intuitional method by saying: <q>Whatever you are totally ignorant of,
assert to be the explanation of everything else!</q> Yet he would probably grant that
he begins his investigations by assuming his own existence. The doctrine of the
Trinity is not wholly comprehensible by us, and we accept it at the first upon the testimony
of Scripture; the full proof of it is found in the fact that each successive doctrine
of theology is bound up with it, and with it stands or falls. The Trinity is rational
because it explains Christian experience as well as Christian doctrine.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Even though there were no orderly arrangement of these facts, either
in nature or in Scripture, an accurate systematizing of them by the human
mind would not therefore be proved impossible, unless a principle were
assumed which would show all physical science to be equally impossible.
Astronomy and geology are constructed by putting together multitudinous
facts which at first sight seem to have no order. So with theology. And
yet, although revelation does not present to us a dogmatic system ready-made,
a dogmatic system is not only implicitly contained therein, but parts
of the system are wrought out in the epistles of the New Testament, as for
example in Rom. 5:12-19; 1 Cor. 15:3, 4; 8:6; 1 Tim. 3:16; Heb. 6:1,
2.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We may illustrate the construction of theology from the dissected map, two pieces
of which a father puts together, leaving his child to put together the rest. Or we may
illustrate from the physical universe, which to the unthinking reveals little of its order.
<q>Nature makes no fences.</q> One thing seems to glide into another. It is man's business
to distinguish and classify and combine. Origen: <q>God gives us truth in single
threads, which we must weave into a finished texture.</q> Andrew Fuller said of the
doctrines of theology that <q>they are united together like chain-shot, so that, whichever
one enters the heart, the others must certainly follow.</q> George Herbert: <q>Oh
that I knew how all thy lights combine, And the configuration of their glory; Seeing
not only how each verse doth shine, But all the constellations of the story!</q>
</p>

<p>
Scripture hints at the possibilities of combination, in <emph>Rom. 5:12-19</emph>, with its grouping of
the facts of sin and salvation about the two persons, Adam and Christ; in <emph>Rom. 4:24, 25</emph>,
with its linking of the resurrection of Christ and our justification; in <emph>1 Cor. 3:6</emph>, with its
indication of the relations between the Father and Christ; in <emph>1 Tim. 3:16</emph>, with its poetical
summary of the facts of redemption (see Commentaries of DeWette, Meyer, Fairbairn);
in <emph>Heb. 6:1, 2</emph>, with its statement of the first principles of the Christian faith.
God's furnishing of concrete facts in theology, which we ourselves are left to systematize,
is in complete accordance with his method of procedure with regard to the
development of other sciences. See Martineau, Essays, 1:29, 40; Am. Theol. Rev.,
1859:101-126&mdash;art. on the Idea, Sources and Uses of Christian Theology.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Necessity of Theology.</head>

<p>
The necessity of theology has its grounds:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>In the organizing instinct of the human mind.</hi> This organizing
principle is a part of our constitution. The mind cannot endure confusion
or apparent contradiction in known facts. The tendency to harmonize
and unify its knowledge appears as soon as the mind becomes reflective;
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
just in proportion to its endowments and culture does the impulse to systematize
and formulate increase. This is true of all departments of human
inquiry, but it is peculiarly true of our knowledge of God. Since the truth
with regard to God is the most important of all, theology meets the deepest
want of man's rational nature. Theology is a rational necessity. If all
existing theological systems were destroyed to-day, new systems would rise
to-morrow. So inevitable is the operation of this law, that those who most
decry theology show nevertheless that they have made a theology for themselves,
and often one sufficiently meagre and blundering. Hostility to
theology, where it does not originate in mistaken fears for the corruption
of God's truth or in a naturally illogical structure of mind, often proceeds
from a license of speculation which cannot brook the restraints of a complete
Scriptural system.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
President E. G. Robinson: <q>Every man has as much theology as he can hold.</q> Consciously
or unconsciously, we philosophize, as naturally as we speak prose. <q>Se
moquer de la philosophie c'est vraiment philosopher.</q> Gore, Incarnation, 21&mdash;<q>Christianity
became metaphysical, only because man is rational. This rationality means that
he must attempt <q>to give account of things,</q> as Plato said, <q>because he was a man, not
merely because he was a Greek.</q></q> Men often denounce systematic theology, while
they extol the sciences of matter. Has God then left only the facts with regard to himself
in so unrelated a state that man cannot put them together? All other sciences are
valuable only as they contain or promote the knowledge of God. If it is praiseworthy
to classify beetles, one science may be allowed to reason concerning God and the soul.
In speaking of Schelling, Royce, Spirit of Modern Philosophy, 173, satirically exhorts
us: <q>Trust your genius; follow your noble heart; change your doctrine whenever
your heart changes, and change your heart often,&mdash;such is the practical creed of the
romanticists.</q> Ritchie, Darwin and Hegel, 3&mdash;<q>Just those persons who disclaim metaphysics
are sometimes most apt to be infected with the disease they profess to abhor&mdash;and
not to know when they have it.</q> See Shedd, Discourses and Essays, 27-52; Murphy,
Scientific Bases of Faith, 195-199.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>In the relation of systematic truth to the development of character.</hi>
Truth thoroughly digested is essential to the growth of Christian
character in the individual and in the church. All knowledge of God has
its influence upon character, but most of all the knowledge of spiritual
facts in their relations. Theology cannot, as has sometimes been objected,
deaden the religious affections, since it only draws out from their sources
and puts into rational connection with each other the truths which are
best adapted to nourish the religions affections. On the other hand, the
strongest Christians are those who have the firmest grasp upon the great
doctrines of Christianity; the heroic ages of the church are those which
have witnessed most consistently to them; the piety that can be injured by
the systematic exhibition of them must be weak, or mystical, or mistaken.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Some knowledge is necessary to conversion&mdash;at least, knowledge of sin and knowledge
of a Savior; and the putting together of these two great truths is a beginning of
theology. All subsequent growth of character is conditioned upon the increase of this
knowledge. <emph>Col. 1:10&mdash;αὐξανόμενοι τῇ ἐπιγνώσει τοῦ Θεοῦ [omit ἐν] = <q>increasing by the knowledge
of God</q></emph>&mdash;the instrumental dative represents the knowledge of God as the dew or rain
which nurtures the growth of the plant; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>3 Pet. 3:18&mdash;<q>grow in the grace and knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.</q></emph> For texts which represent truth as nourishment, see <emph>Jer. 3:15&mdash;<q>feed
you with knowledge and understanding</q></emph>; <emph>Mat. 4:4&mdash;<q>Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every
word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 3:1, 2&mdash;<q>babes in Christ ... I fed you with milk, not
with meat</q></emph>; <emph>Heb. 5:14&mdash;<q>but solid food is for full-grown men.</q></emph> Christian character rests upon Christian
truth as its foundation; see <emph>1 Cor. 3:10-15&mdash;<q>I laid a foundation, and another buildeth thereon.</q></emph>
See Dorus Clarke, Saying the Catechism; Simon, on Christ Doct. and Life, in Bib. Sac.,
July, 1884:433-439.
</p>

<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>

<p>
Ignorance is the mother of superstition, not of devotion. Talbot W. Chambers:&mdash;<q>Doctrine
without duty is a tree without fruits; duty without doctrine is a tree without
roots.</q> Christian morality is a fruit which grows only from the tree of Christian
doctrine. We cannot long keep the fruits of faith after we have cut down the tree
upon which they have grown. Balfour, Foundations of Belief, 82&mdash;<q>Naturalistic virtue
is parasitic, and when the host perishes, the parasite perishes also. Virtue without
religion will die.</q> Kidd, Social Evolution, 214&mdash;<q>Because the fruit survives for a time
when removed from the tree, and even mellows and ripens, shall we say that it is
independent of the tree?</q> The twelve manner of fruits on the Christmas-tree are
only tacked on,&mdash;they never grew there, and they can never reproduce their kind.
The withered apple swells out under the exhausted receiver, but it will go back again
to its former shrunken form; so the self-righteousness of those who get out of the
atmosphere of Christ and have no divine ideal with which to compare themselves.
W. M. Lisle: <q>It is the mistake and disaster of the Christian world that effects are
sought instead of causes.</q> George A. Gordon, Christ of To-day, 28&mdash;<q>Without the historical
Christ and personal love for that Christ, the broad theology of our day will
reduce itself to a dream, powerless to rouse a sleeping church.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>In the importance to the preacher of definite and just views of
Christian doctrine.</hi> His chief intellectual qualification must be the
power clearly and comprehensively to conceive, and accurately and powerfully
to express, the truth. He can be the agent of the Holy Spirit in converting
and sanctifying men, only as he can wield <q>the sword of the
Spirit, which is the word of God</q> (Eph. 6:17), or, in other language,
only as he can impress truth upon the minds and consciences of his
hearers. Nothing more certainly nullifies his efforts than confusion and
inconsistency in his statements of doctrine. His object is to replace
obscure and erroneous conceptions among his hearers by those which are
correct and vivid. He cannot do this without knowing the facts with
regard to God in their relations&mdash;knowing them, in short, as parts of a
system. With this truth he is put in trust. To mutilate it or misrepresent
it, is not only sin against the Revealer of it,&mdash;it may prove the ruin of
men's souls. The best safeguard against such mutilation or misrepresentation,
is the diligent study of the several doctrines of the faith in their
relations to one another, and especially to the central theme of theology,
the person and work of Jesus Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The more refined and reflective the age, the more it requires reasons for feeling.
Imagination, as exercised in poetry and eloquence and as exhibited in politics or
war, is not less strong than of old,&mdash;it is only more rational. Notice the progress from
<q>Buncombe</q>, in legislative and forensic oratory, to sensible and logical address. Bassanio
in Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice, 1:1:113&mdash;<q>Gratiano speaks an infinite deal
of nothing.... His reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff.</q>
So in pulpit oratory, mere Scripture quotation and fervid appeal are no longer sufficient.
As well be a howling dervish, as to indulge in windy declamation. Thought is
the staple of preaching. Feeling must be roused, but only by bringing men to <emph><q>the
knowledge of the truth</q> (2 Tim. 2:25)</emph>. The preacher must furnish the basis for feeling by producing
intelligent conviction. He must instruct before he can move. If the object of
the preacher is first to know God, and secondly to make God known, then the study of
theology is absolutely necessary to his success.
</p>

<p>
Shall the physician practice medicine without study of physiology, or the lawyer
practice law without study of jurisprudence? Professor Blackie: <q>One may as
well expect to make a great patriot out of a fencing-master, as to make a great orator
out of a mere rhetorician.</q> The preacher needs doctrine, to prevent his being a mere
barrel-organ, playing over and over the same tunes. John Henry Newman: <q>The
false preacher is one who has to say something; the true preacher is one who has something
to say.</q> Spurgeon, Autobiography, 1:167&mdash;<q>Constant change of creed is sure loss.
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
If a tree has to be taken up two or three times a year, you will not need to build a very
large loft in which to store the apples. When people are shifting their doctrinal principles,
they do not bring forth much fruit.... We shall never have great preachers
till we have great divines. You cannot build a man of war out of a currant-bush,
nor can great soul-moving preachers be formed out of superficial students.</q> Illustrate
the harmfulness of ignorant and erroneous preaching, by the mistake in a physician's
prescription; by the wrong trail at Lake Placid which led astray those ascending Whiteface;
by the sowing of acorns whose crop was gathered only after a hundred years.
Slight divergences from correct doctrine on our part may be ruinously exaggerated
in those who come after us. Though the moth-miller has no teeth, its offspring has.
<emph>2 Tim. 2:2&mdash;<q>And the things which thou hast heard from me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful
men, who shall be able to teach others also.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>In the intimate connection between correct doctrine and the
safety and aggressive power of the church.</hi> The safety and progress of
the church is dependent upon her <q>holding the pattern of sound words</q>
(2 Tim. 1:13), and serving as <q>pillar and ground of the truth</q> (1 Tim. 3:15).
Defective understanding of the truth results sooner or later in
defects of organization, of operation, and of life. Thorough comprehension
of Christian truth as an organized system furnishes, on the other hand,
not only an invaluable defense against heresy and immorality, but also an
indispensable stimulus and instrument in aggressive labor for the world's
conversion.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The creeds of Christendom have not originated in mere speculative curiosity and
logical hair-splitting. They are statements of doctrine in which the attacked and
imperiled church has sought to express the truth which constitutes her very life.
Those who deride the early creeds have small conception of the intellectual acumen and
the moral earnestness which went to the making of them. The creeds of the third and
fourth centuries embody the results of controversies which exhausted the possibilities
of heresy with regard to the Trinity and the person of Christ, and which set up bars
against false doctrine to the end of time. Mahaffy: <q>What converted the world
was not the example of Christ's life,&mdash;it was the dogma of his death.</q> Coleridge: <q>He
who does not withstand, has no standing ground of his own.</q> Mrs. Browning: <q>Entire
intellectual toleration is the mark of those who believe nothing.</q> E. G. Robinson,
Christian Theology, 360-362&mdash;<q>A doctrine is but a precept in the style of a proposition;
and a precept is but a doctrine in the form of a command.... Theology is God's
garden; its trees are trees of his planting; and <emph><q>all the trees of the Lord are full of sap</q> (Ps. 104:16).</emph></q>
</p>

<p>
Bose, Ecumenical Councils: <q>A creed is not catholic because a council of many or
of few bishops decreed it, but because it expresses the common conviction of entire
generations of men and women who turned their understanding of the New Testament
into those forms of words.</q> Dorner: <q>The creeds are the precipitate of the religious
consciousness of mighty men and times.</q> Foster, Christ. Life and Theol., 162&mdash;<q>It
ordinarily requires the shock of some great event to startle men into clear apprehension
and crystallization of their substantial belief. Such a shock was given by the
rough and coarse doctrine of Arius, upon which the conclusion arrived at in the Council
of Nice followed as rapidly as in chilled water the crystals of ice will sometimes
form when the containing vessel receives a blow.</q> Balfour, Foundations of Belief, 287&mdash;<q>The
creeds were not explanations, but rather denials that the Arian and Gnostic
explanations were sufficient, and declarations that they irremediably impoverished the
idea of the Godhead. They insisted on preserving that idea in all its inexplicable fulness.</q>
Denny, Studies in Theology, 192&mdash;<q>Pagan philosophies tried to capture the
church for their own ends, and to turn it into a school. In self-defense the church was
compelled to become somewhat of a school on its own account. It had to assert its
facts; it had to define its ideas; it had to interpret in its own way those facts which
men were misinterpreting.</q>
</p>

<p>
Professor Howard Osgood: <q>A creed is like a backbone. A man does not need to
wear his backbone in front of him; but he must have a backbone, and a straight one,
or he will be a flexible if not a humpbacked Christian.</q> Yet we must remember that
creeds are <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credita</foreign>, and not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credenda</foreign>; historical statements of what the church <emph>has</emph>
believed, not infallible prescriptions of what the church <emph>must</emph> believe. George Dana
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
Boardman, The Church, 98&mdash;<q>Creeds are apt to become cages.</q> Schurman, Agnosticism,
151&mdash;<q>The creeds were meant to be defensive fortifications of religion; alas,
that they should have sometimes turned their artillery against the citadel itself.</q>
T. H. Green: <q>We are told that we must be loyal to the beliefs of the Fathers. Yes, but
who knows what the Fathers believe now?</q> George A. Gordon, Christ of To-day, 60&mdash;<q>The
assumption that the Holy Spirit is not concerned in the development of theological
thought, nor manifest in the intellectual evolution of mankind, is the superlative
heresy of our generation.... The metaphysics of Jesus are absolutely essential
to his ethics.... If his thought is a dream, his endeavor for man is a delusion.</q>
See Schaff, Creeds of Christendom, 1:8, 15, 16; Storrs, Div. Origin of Christianity, 121;
Ian Maclaren (John Watson), Cure of Souls, 152; Frederick Harrison, in Fortnightly
Rev., Jan. 1889.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>In the direct and indirect injunctions of Scripture.</hi> The Scripture
urges upon us the thorough and comprehensive study of the truth
(John 5:39, marg.,&mdash;<q>Search the Scriptures</q>), the comparing and
harmonizing of its different parts (1 Cor. 2:13&mdash;<q>comparing spiritual
things with spiritual</q>), the gathering of all about the great central fact of
revelation (Col. 1:27&mdash;<q>which is Christ in you, the hope of glory</q>), the
preaching of it in its wholeness as well as in its due proportions (2 Tim. 4:2&mdash;<q>Preach
the word</q>). The minister of the Gospel is called <q>a scribe
who hath been made a disciple to the kingdom of heaven</q> (Mat. 13:52);
the <q>pastors</q> of the churches are at the same time to be <q>teachers</q>
(Eph. 4:11); the bishop must be <q>apt to teach</q> (1 Tim. 3:2), <q>handling
aright the word of truth</q> (2 Tim. 2:15), <q>holding to the faithful word
which is according to the teaching, that he may be able both to exhort in
the sound doctrine and to convict the gainsayers</q> (Tit. 1:9).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
As a means of instructing the church and of securing progress in his own understanding
of Christian truth, it is well for the pastor to preach regularly each month a
doctrinal sermon, and to expound in course the principal articles of the faith. The
treatment of doctrine in these sermons should be simple enough to be comprehensible
by intelligent youth; it should be made vivid and interesting by the help of brief
illustrations; and at least one-third of each sermon should be devoted to the practical
applications of the doctrine propounded. See Jonathan Edwards's sermon on the
Importance of the Knowledge of Divine Truth, in Works, 4:1-15. The actual sermons
of Edwards, however, are not models of doctrinal preaching for our generation. They
are too scholastic in form, too metaphysical for substance; there is too little of Scripture
and too little of illustration. The doctrinal preaching of the English Puritans in
a similar manner addressed itself almost wholly to adults. The preaching of our Lord
on the other hand was adapted also to children. No pastor should count himself
faithful, who permits his young people to grow up without regular instruction from
the pulpit in the whole circle of Christian doctrine. Shakespeare, K. Henry VI, 2nd
part, 4:7&mdash;<q>Ignorance is the curse of God; knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to
heaven.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>V. Relation of Theology to Religion.</head>

<p>
Theology and religion are related to each
other as effects, in different spheres, of the same cause. As theology is an
effect produced in the sphere of systematic thought by the facts respecting
God and the universe, so religion is an effect which these same facts produce
in the sphere of individual and collective life. With regard to the
term <q>religion</q>, notice:
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Derivation.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The derivation from <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>religāre</foreign>, <q>to bind back</q> (man to God), is
negatived by the authority of Cicero and of the best modern etymologists;
by the difficulty, on this hypothesis, of explaining such forms as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>religio</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>religens</foreign>; and by the necessity, in that case, of presupposing a fuller
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
knowledge of sin and redemption than was common to the ancient world.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The more correct derivation is from <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>relegĕre</foreign>, <q>to go over again,</q>
<q>carefully to ponder.</q> Its original meaning is therefore <q>reverent
observance</q> (of duties due to the gods).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
For advocacy of the derivation of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>religio</foreign>, as meaning <q>binding duty,</q> from <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>religāre</foreign>,
see Lange, Dogmatik, 1:185-196. This derivation was first proposed by Lactantius,
Inst. Div., 4:28, a Christian writer. To meet the objection that the form <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>religio</foreign> seems
derived from a verb of the third conjugation, Lange cites <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>rebellio</foreign>, from <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>rebellāre</foreign>, and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>optio</foreign>, from <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>optāre</foreign>. But we reply that these verbs of the first conjugation, like many
others, are probably derived from obsolete verbs of the third conjugation. For the
derivation favored in the text, see Curtius, Griechische Etymologie, 5te Aufl., 364;
Fick, Vergl. Wörterb. der indoger. Spr., 2:227; Vanicek, Gr.-Lat. Etym. Wörterb.,
2:829; Andrews, Latin Lexicon, <hi rend='italic'>in voce</hi>; Nitzsch, System of Christ. Doctrine, 7; Van
Oosterzee, Dogmatics, 75-77; Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 1:6; Kahnis, Dogmatik, 3:18;
Menzies, History of Religion, 11; Max Müller, Natural Religion, lect. 2.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. False Conceptions.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Religion is not, as Hegel declared, a kind of knowing; for it
would then be only an incomplete form of philosophy, and the measure of
knowledge in each case would be the measure of piety.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In a system of idealistic pantheism, like that of Hegel, God is the subject of religion
as well as its object. Religion is God's knowing of himself through the human consciousness.
Hegel did not utterly ignore other elements in religion. <q>Feeling, intuition,
and faith belong to it,</q> he said, <q>and mere cognition is one-sided.</q> Yet he was
always looking for the movement of <emph>thought</emph> in all forms of life; God and the universe
were but developments of the primordial <emph>idea</emph>. <q>What knowledge is worth knowing,</q>
he asked, <q>if God is unknowable? To know God is eternal life, and thinking is also
true worship.</q> Hegel's error was in regarding life as a process of thought, rather than
in regarding thought as a process of life. Here was the reason for the bitterness
between Hegel and Schleiermacher. Hegel rightly considered that feeling must become
intelligent before it is truly religious, but he did not recognize the supreme importance
of love in a theological system. He gave even less place to the will than he gave to the
emotions, and he failed to see that the knowledge of God of which Scripture speaks is
a knowing, not of the intellect alone, but of the whole man, including the affectional
and voluntary nature.
</p>

<p>
Goethe: <q>How can a man come to know himself? Never by thinking, but by doing.
Try to do your duty, and you will know at once what you are worth. You cannot play
the flute by blowing alone,&mdash;you must use your fingers.</q> So we can never come to
know God by thinking alone. <emph>John 7:17&mdash;<q>If any man willeth to do his will, he will know of the teaching,
whether it is of God.</q></emph> The Gnostics, Stapfer, Henry VIII, all show that there may be
much theological knowledge without true religion. Chillingworth's maxim, <q>The
Bible only, the religion of Protestants,</q> is inadequate and inaccurate; for the Bible,
without faith, love, and obedience, may become a fetich and a snare: <emph>John 5:39,40&mdash;<q>Ye
search the Scriptures, ... and ye will not come to me, that ye may have life.</q></emph> See Sterrett, Studies in
Hegel's Philosophy of Religion; Porter, Human Intellect, 59, 60, 412, 525-536, 589, 650;
Morell, Hist. Philos., 476, 477; Hamerton, Intel. Life, 214; Bib. Sac., 9:374.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Religion is not, as Schleiermacher held, the mere feeling of dependence;
for such feeling of dependence is not religious, unless exercised
toward God and accompanied by moral effort.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In German theology, Schleiermacher constitutes the transition from the old rationalism
to the evangelical faith. <q>Like Lazarus, with the grave clothes of a pantheistic
philosophy entangling his steps,</q> yet with a Moravian experience of the life of God in
the soul, he based religion upon the inner certainties of Christian feeling. But, as Principal
Fairbairn remarks, <q>Emotion is impotent unless it speaks out of conviction; and
where conviction is, there will be emotion which is potent to persuade.</q> If Christianity
is religious feeling alone, then there is no essential difference between it and other
religions, for all alike are products of the religious sentiment. But Christianity is distinguished
from other religions by its peculiar religious conceptions. Doctrine precedes
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
life, and Christian doctrine, not mere religious feeling, is the cause of Christianity
as a distinctive religion. Though faith begins in feeling, moreover, it does not
end there. We see the worthlessness of mere feeling in the transient emotions of
theatre-goers, and in the occasional phenomena of revivals.
</p>

<p>
Sabatier, Philos. Relig., 27, adds to Schleiermacher's passive element of <emph>dependence</emph>,
the active element of <emph>prayer</emph>. Kaftan, Dogmatik, 10&mdash;<q>Schleiermacher regards God as
the <emph>Source</emph> of our being, but forgets that he is also our <emph>End</emph>.</q> Fellowship and progress
are as important elements in religion as is dependence; and fellowship must come
before progress&mdash;such fellowship as presupposes pardon and life. Schleiermacher
apparently believed in neither a personal God nor his own personal immortality; see
his Life and Letters, 2:77-90; Martineau, Study of Religion, 2:357. Charles Hodge
compares him to a ladder in a pit&mdash;a good thing for those who wish to get out, but not
for those who wish to get in. Dorner: <q>The Moravian brotherhood was his mother;
Greece was his nurse.</q> On Schleiermacher, see Herzog, Realencyclopädie, <hi rend='italic'>in voce</hi>; Bib.
Sac., 1852:375; 1883:534; Liddon, Elements of Religion, lect. I; Ebrard, Dogmatik, 1:14;
Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 1:175; Fisher, Supernat. Origin of Christianity, 563-570;
Caird, Philos. Religion, 160-186.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Religion is not, as Kant maintained, morality or moral action; for
morality is conformity to an abstract law of right, while religion is essentially
a relation to a person, from whom the soul receives blessing and to
whom it surrenders itself in love and obedience.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Kant, Kritik der praktischen Vernunft, Beschluss: <q>I know of but two beautiful
things, the starry heavens above my head, and the sense of duty within my heart.</q>
But the mere sense of duty often distresses. We object to the word <q>obey</q> as the
imperative of religion, because (1) it makes religion a matter of the will only; (2) will
presupposes affection; (3) love is not subject to will; (4) it makes God all law, and no
grace; (5) it makes the Christian a servant only, not a friend; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>John 15:15&mdash;<q>No longer do
I call you servants ... but I have called you friends</q></emph>&mdash;a relation not of service but of love
(Westcott, Bib. Com., <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>). The voice that speaks is the voice of love, rather than the
voice of law. We object also to Matthew Arnold's definition: <q>Religion is ethics
heightened, enkindled, lit up by feeling; morality touched with emotion.</q> This leaves
out of view the receptive element in religion, as well as its relation to a personal God.
A truer statement would be that religion is morality toward God, as morality is
religion toward man. Bowne, Philos. of Theism, 251&mdash;<q>Morality that goes beyond
mere conscientiousness must have recourse to religion</q>; see Lotze, Philos. of Religion,
128-142. Goethe: <q>Unqualified activity, of whatever kind, leads at last to bankruptcy</q>;
see also Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 1:65-69; Shedd, Sermons to the Natural Man, 244-246;
Liddon, Elements of Religion, 19.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. Essential Idea.</head>

<p>Religion in its essential idea is a life in God, a life
lived in recognition of God, in communion with God, and under control of
the indwelling Spirit of God. Since it is a life, it cannot be described as consisting
solely in the exercise of any one of the powers of intellect, affection,
or will. As physical life involves the unity and coöperation of all the organs
of the body, so religion, or spiritual life, involves the united working of all
the powers of the soul. To feeling, however, we must assign the logical
priority, since holy affection toward God, imparted in regeneration, is the
condition of truly knowing God and of truly serving him.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See Godet, on the Ultimate Design of Man&mdash;<q>God in man, and man in God</q>&mdash;in
Princeton Rev., Nov. 1880; Pfleiderer, Die Religion, 5-79, and Religionsphilosophie, 255&mdash;Religion
is <q>Sache des ganzen Geisteslebens</q>: Crane, Religion of To-morrow, 4&mdash;<q>Religion
is the personal influence of the immanent God</q>; Sterrett, Reason and Authority
in Religion, 31, 32&mdash;<q>Religion is the reciprocal relation or communion of God and man,
involving (1) revelation, (2) faith</q>; Dr. J. W. A. Stewart: <q>Religion is fellowship with
God</q>; Pascal: <q>Piety is God sensible to the heart</q>; Ritschl, Justif. and Reconcil., 13&mdash;<q>Christianity
is an ellipse with two foci&mdash;Christ as Redeemer and Christ as King,
Christ for us and Christ in us, redemption and morality, religion and ethics</q>; Kaftan,
Dogmatik, 8&mdash;<q>The Christian religion is (1) the <emph>kingdom of God</emph> as a goal above the
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
world, to be attained by moral development here, and (2) <emph>reconciliation with God</emph> permitting
attainment of this goal in spite of our sins. Christian theology once grounded
itself in man's natural knowledge of God; we now start with religion, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, that
Christian knowledge of God which we call faith.</q>
</p>

<p>
Herbert Spencer: <q>Religion is an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> theory of the universe</q>; Romanes,
Thoughts on Religion, 43, adds: <q>which assumes intelligent personality as the originating
cause of the universe, science dealing with the <emph>How</emph>, the phenomenal process,
religion dealing with the <emph>Who</emph>, the intelligent Personality who works through the
process.</q> Holland, in Lux Mundi, 27&mdash;<q>Natural life is the life in God which has not yet
arrived at this recognition</q>&mdash;the recognition of the fact that God is in all things&mdash;<q>it
is not yet, as such, religious; ... Religion is the discovery, by the son, of a Father who is
in all his works, yet is distinct from them all.</q> Dewey, Psychology, 283&mdash;<q>Feeling
finds its absolutely universal expression in religious emotion, which is the finding or
realization of self in a completely realized personality which unites in itself truth, or
the complete unity of the relations of all objects, beauty or the complete unity of all
ideal values, and rightness or the complete unity of all persons. The emotion which
accompanies the religious life is that which accompanies the complete activity of ourselves;
the self is realized and finds its true life in God.</q> Upton, Hibbert Lectures,
262&mdash;<q>Ethics is simply the growing insight into, and the effort to actualize in society,
the sense of fundamental kinship and identity of substance in all men; while religion
is the emotion and the devotion which attend the realization in our self-consciousness
of an inmost spiritual relationship arising out of that unity of substance which constitutes
man the true son of the eternal Father.</q> See Van Oosterzee, Dogmatics, 81-85;
Julius Müller, Doct. Sin, 2:227; Nitzsch, Syst. of Christ. Doct., 10-28; Luthardt, Fund.
Truths, 147; Twesten, Dogmatik, 1:12.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>4. Inferences.</head>

<p>
From this definition of religion it follows:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That in strictness there is but one religion. Man is a religious being,
indeed, as having the capacity for this divine life. He is actually religious,
however, only when he enters into this living relation to God. False
religions are the caricatures which men given to sin, or the imaginations
which men groping after light, form of this life of the soul in God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Peabody, Christianity the Religion of Nature, 18&mdash;<q>If Christianity be true, it is not <emph>a</emph>
religion, but <emph>the</emph> religion. If Judaism be also true, it is so not as distinct from but as
coincident with Christianity, the one religion to which it can bear only the relation of
a part to the whole. If there be portions of truth in other religious systems, they are
not portions of other religions, but portions of the one religion which somehow or
other became incorporated with fables and falsities.</q> John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity,
1:25&mdash;<q>You can never get at the true idea or essence of religion merely by
trying to find out something that is common to all religions; and it is not the lower
religions that explain the higher, but conversely the higher religion explains all the
lower religions.</q> George P. Fisher: <q>The recognition of certain elements of truth in
the ethnic religions does not mean that Christianity has defects which are to be repaired
by borrowing from them; it only means that the ethnic faiths have in fragments what
Christianity has as a whole. Comparative religion does not bring to Christianity new
truth; it provides illustrations of how Christian truth meets human needs and aspirations,
and gives a full vision of that which the most spiritual and gifted among the
heathen only dimly discerned.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dr. C. H. Parkhurst, sermon on <emph>Proverbs 20:27&mdash;<q>The spirit of man is the lamp of Jehovah</q></emph>&mdash;<q>a lamp,
but not necessarily lighted; a lamp that can be lit only by the touch of a divine flame</q>&mdash;man
has naturally and universally a capacity for religion, but is by no means naturally
and universally religious. All false religions have some element of truth; otherwise
they could never have gained or kept their hold upon mankind. We need to recognize
these elements of truth in dealing with them. There is some silver in a counterfeit dollar,
else it would deceive no one; but the thin washing of silver over the lead does not
prevent it from being bad money. Clarke, Christian Theology, 8&mdash;<q>See Paul's methods
of dealing with heathen religion, in Acts 14 with gross paganism and in Acts 17 with its
cultured form. He treats it with sympathy and justice. Christian theology has the
advantage of walking in the light of God's self-manifestation in Christ, while heathen
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
religions grope after God and worship him in ignorance</q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Acts 14:16&mdash;<q>We ...
bring you good tidings, that ye should turn from these vain things unto a living God</q>;</emph> <emph>17:22&mdash;<q>I perceive that ye
are more than usually reverent toward the divinities.... What therefore ye worship in ignorance, this I set
forth unto you.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
Matthew Arnold: <q>Children of men! the unseen Power whose eye Forever doth
accompany mankind, Hath looked on no religion scornfully That man did ever find.
Which has not taught weak wills how much they can? Which has not fallen on the
dry heart like rain? Which has not cried to sunk, self-weary man, Thou must be born
again?</q> Christianity is absolutely exclusive, because it is absolutely inclusive. It is
not an amalgamation of other religions, but it has in it all that is best and truest
in other religions. It is the white light that contains all the colored rays. God
may have made disclosures of truth outside of Judaism, and did so in Balaam
and Melchisedek, in Confucius and Socrates. But while other religions have a
relative excellence, Christianity is the absolute religion that contains all excellencies.
Matheson, Messages of the Old Religions, 328-342&mdash;<q>Christianity is reconciliation.
Christianity includes the aspiration of Egypt; it sees, in this aspiration, God in the soul
(Brahmanism); recognizes the evil power of sin with Parseeism; goes back to a pure
beginning like China; surrenders itself to human brotherhood like Buddha; gets all
things from within like Judaism; makes the present life beautiful like Greece; seeks
a universal kingdom like Rome; shows a growth of divine life, like the Teuton. Christianity
is the manifold wisdom of God.</q> See also Van Oosterzee, Dogmatics, 88-93.
Shakespeare: <q>There is some soul of goodness in things evil, Would men observingly
distill it out</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That the content of religion is greater than that of theology. The
facts of religion come within the range of theology only so far as they can
be definitely conceived, accurately expressed in language, and brought
into rational relation to each other.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This principle enables us to define the proper limits of religious fellowship. It should
be as wide as is religion itself. But it is important to remember what religion is.
Religion is not to be identified with the capacity for religion. Nor can we regard the
perversions and caricatures of religion as meriting our fellowship. Otherwise we might
be required to have fellowship with devil-worship, polygamy, thuggery, and the inquisition;
for all these have been dignified with the name of religion. True religion involves
some knowledge, however rudimentary, of the true God, the God of righteousness;
some sense of sin as the contrast between human character and the divine standard;
some casting of the soul upon divine mercy and a divine way of salvation, in place of
self-righteous earning of merit and reliance upon one's works and one's record;
some practical effort to realize ethical principle in a pure life and in influence over
others. Wherever these marks of true religion appear, even in Unitarians, Romanists,
Jews or Buddhists, there we recognize the demand for fellowship. But we also
attribute these germs of true religion to the inworking of the omnipresent Christ,
<emph><q>the light which lighteth every man</q> (John 1:9),</emph> and we see in them incipient repentance and faith,
even though the Christ who is their object is yet unknown by name. <emph>Christian</emph> fellowship
must have a larger basis in accepted Christian truth, and <emph>Church</emph> fellowship a still
larger basis in common acknowledgment of N. T. teaching as to the church. <emph>Religious</emph>
fellowship, in the widest sense, rests upon the fact that <emph><q>God is no respecter of persons: but in
every nation he that feareth him and worketh righteousness is acceptable to him</q> (Acts 10:34, 35)</emph>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That religion is to be distinguished from formal worship, which is
simply the outward expression of religion. As such expression, worship is
<q>formal communion between God and his people.</q> In it God speaks to
man, and man to God. It therefore properly includes the reading of
Scripture and preaching on the side of God, and prayer and song on the
side of the people.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Sterrett, Reason and Authority in Religion, 166&mdash;<q>Christian worship is the utterance
(outerance) of the spirit.</q> But there is more in true love than can be put into a love-letter,
and there is more in true religion than can be expressed either in theology or
in worship. Christian worship is communion between God and man. But communion
cannot be one-sided. Madame de Staël, whom Heine called <q>a whirlwind in petticoats,</q>
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
ended one of her brilliant soliloquies by saying: <q>What a delightful conversation we
have had!</q> We may find a better illustration of the nature of worship in Thomas à
Kempis's dialogues between the saint and his Savior, in the Imitation of Christ.
Goethe: <q>Against the great superiority of another there is no remedy but love....
To praise a man is to put one's self on his level.</q> If this be the effect of loving and
praising man, what must be the effect of loving and praising God! Inscription in Grasmere
Church: <q>Whoever thou art that enterest this church, leave it not without one
prayer to God for thyself, for those who minister, and for those who worship here.</q>
In <emph>James 1:27&mdash;<q>Pure religion and undefiled before our God and Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in
their affliction, and to keep oneself unspotted from the world</q></emph>&mdash;<q><emph>religion</emph>,</q> θρησκεία, is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cultus exterior</foreign>;
and the meaning is that <q>the external service, the outward garb, the very ritual of
Christianity, is a life of purity, love and self-devotion. What its true essence, its
inmost spirit may be, the writer does not say, but leaves this to be inferred.</q> On the
relation between religion and worship, see Prof. Day, in New Englander, Jan. 1882;
Prof. T. Harwood Pattison, Public Prayer; Trench, Syn. N. T., 1; sec. 48; Coleridge,
Aids to Reflection, Introd., Aphorism 23; Lightfoot, Gal., 351, note 2.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Material of Theology.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Sources of Theology.</head>

<p>
God himself, in the last analysis, must be the
only source of knowledge with regard to his own being and relations.
Theology is therefore a summary and explanation of the content of God's
self-revelations. These are, first, the revelation of God in nature; secondly
and supremely, the revelation of God in the Scriptures.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Ambrose: <q>To whom shall I give greater credit concerning God than to God himself?</q>
Von Baader: <q>To know God without God is impossible; there is no knowledge
without him who is the prime source of knowledge.</q> C. A. Briggs, Whither, 8&mdash;<q>God
reveals truth in several spheres: in universal nature, in the constitution of mankind,
in the history of our race, in the Sacred Scriptures, but above all in the person of Jesus
Christ our Lord.</q> F. H. Johnson, What is Reality? 399&mdash;<q>The teacher intervenes
when needed. Revelation <emph>helps</emph> reason and conscience, but is not a <emph>substitute</emph> for them.
But Catholicism affirms this substitution for the church, and Protestantism for the
Bible. The Bible, like nature, gives many free gifts, but more in the germ. Growing
ethical ideals must interpret the Bible.</q> A. J. F. Behrends: <q>The Bible is only a telescope,
not the eye which sees, nor the stars which the telescope brings to view. It is
your business and mine to see the stars with our own eyes.</q> Schurman, Agnosticism,
178&mdash;<q>The Bible is a glass through which to see the living God. But it is useless when
you put your eyes out.</q>
</p>

<p>
We can know God only so far as he has revealed himself. The immanent God is
known, but the transcendent God we do not know any more than we know the side of
the moon that is turned away from us. A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 118&mdash;<q>The
word <q>authority</q> is derived from <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>auctor</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>augeo</foreign>, <q>to add.</q> Authority adds something
to the truth communicated. The thing added is the personal element of <emph>witness</emph>. This
is needed wherever there is ignorance which cannot be removed by our own effort, or
unwillingness which results from our own sin. In religion I need to add to my own
knowledge that which God imparts. Reason, conscience, church, Scripture, are all
delegated and subordinate authorities; the only original and supreme authority is God
himself, or Christ, who is only God revealed and made comprehensible by us.</q> Gore,
Incarnation, 181&mdash;<q>All legitimate authority represents the reason of God, educating
the reason of man and communicating itself to it.... Man is made in God's image:
he is, in his fundamental capacity, a son of God, and he becomes so in fact, and fully,
through union with Christ. Therefore in the truth of God, as Christ presents it to him,
he can recognize his own better reason,&mdash;to use Plato's beautiful expression, he can
salute it by force of instinct as something akin to himself, before he can give intellectual
account of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Balfour, Foundations of Belief, 332-337, holds that there is no such thing as unassisted
reason, and that, even if there were, natural religion is not one of its products. Behind
all evolution of our own reason, he says, stands the Supreme Reason. <q>Conscience,
ethical ideals, capacity for admiration, sympathy, repentance, righteous indignation,
as well as our delight in beauty and truth, are all derived from God.</q> Kaftan, in Am.
Jour. Theology, 1900; 718, 719, maintains that there is no other principle for dogmatics
than Holy Scripture. Yet he holds that knowledge never comes directly from
Scripture, but from faith. The order is not: Scripture, doctrine, faith; but rather,
Scripture, faith, doctrine. Scripture is no more a direct authority than is the church.
Revelation is addressed to the whole man, that is, to the <emph>will</emph> of the man, and it
claims <emph>obedience</emph> from him. Since all Christian knowledge is mediated through faith,
it rests on obedience to the authority of revelation, and revelation is self-manifestation
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
on the part of God. Kaftan should have recognized more fully that not simply
Scripture, but all knowable truth, is a revelation from God, and that Christ is <emph><q>the light
which lighteth every man</q> (John 1:9)</emph>. Revelation is an organic whole, which begins in nature,
but finds its climax and key in the historical Christ whom Scripture presents to us.
See H. C. Minton's review of Martineau's Seat of Authority, in Presb. and Ref. Rev.,
Apr. 1900:203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Scripture and Nature.</head>

<p>
By nature we here mean not only physical
facts, or facts with regard to the substances, properties, forces, and laws
of the material world, but also spiritual facts, or facts with regard to the
intellectual and moral constitution of man, and the orderly arrangement of
human society and history.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We here use the word <q>nature</q> in the ordinary sense, as including man. There is
another and more proper use of the word <q>nature,</q> which makes it simply a complex
of forces and beings under the law of cause and effect. To nature in this sense man
belongs only as respects his body, while as immaterial and personal he is a supernatural
being. Free will is not under the law of physical and mechanical causation. As
Bushnell has said: <q>Nature and the supernatural together constitute the one system
of God.</q> Drummond, Natural Law in the Spiritual World, 232&mdash;<q>Things are natural
or supernatural according to where we stand. Man is supernatural to the mineral;
God is supernatural to the man.</q> We shall in subsequent chapters use the term
<q>nature</q> in the narrow sense. The universal use of the phrase <q>Natural Theology,</q>
however, compels us in this chapter to employ the word <q>nature</q> in its broader sense
as including man, although we do this under protest, and with this explanation of the
more proper meaning of the term. See Hopkins, in Princeton Review, Sept. 1882:183 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
</p>

<p>
E. G. Robinson: <q>Bushnell separates nature from the supernatural. Nature is a
blind train of causes. God has nothing to do with it, except as he steps into it from
without. Man is supernatural, because he is outside of nature, having the power of
originating an independent train of causes.</q> If this were the proper conception of
nature, then we might be compelled to conclude with P. T. Forsyth, in Faith and
Criticism, 100&mdash;<q>There is no revelation in nature. There can be none, because there
is no forgiveness. We cannot be sure about her. She is only aesthetic. Her ideal is
harmony, not reconciliation.... For the conscience, stricken or strong, she has no
word.... Nature does not contain her own teleology, and for the moral soul that
refuses to be fancy-fed, Christ is the one luminous smile on the dark face of the world.</q>
But this is virtually to confine Christ's revelation to Scripture or to the incarnation.
As there was an astronomy without the telescope, so there was a theology before the
Bible. George Harris, Moral Evolution, 411&mdash;<q>Nature is both evolution and revelation.
As soon as the question <emph>How</emph> is answered, the questions <emph>Whence</emph> and <emph>Why</emph> arise.
Nature is to God what speech is to thought.</q> The title of Henry Drummond's book
should have been: <q>Spiritual Law in the Natural World,</q> for nature is but the free
though regular activity of God; what we call the supernatural is simply his extraordinary
working.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Natural theology.&mdash;The universe is a source of theology. The
Scriptures assert that God has revealed himself in nature. There is not
only an outward witness to his existence and character in the constitution
and government of the universe (Ps. 19; Acts 14:17; Rom. 1:20), but an
inward witness to his existence and character in the heart of every man
(Rom. 1:17, 18, 19, 20, 32; 2:15). The systematic exhibition of these
facts, whether derived from observation, history or science, constitutes
natural theology.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Outward witness: <emph>Ps.19:1-6&mdash;<q>The heavens declare the glory of God</q></emph>; <emph>Acts 14:17&mdash;<q>he left not himself
without witness, in that he did good, and gave you from heaven rains and fruitful seasons</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 1:20&mdash;<q>for the
invisible things of him since the creation of the world are clearly seen, being perceived through the things that are made,
even his everlasting power and divinity.</q></emph> Inward witness: <emph>Rom. 1:19&mdash;τὸ γνωστὸν τοῦ Θεοῦ = <q>that
which is known of God is manifest in them.</q></emph> Compare the ἀποκαλύπτεται of the gospel in verse 17,
with the ἀποκαλύπτεται of wrath in verse 18&mdash;two revelations, one of ὀργή, the other of
χάρις; see Shedd, Homiletics, 11. <emph>Rom. 1:32&mdash;<q>knowing the ordinance of God</q></emph>; <emph>2:15&mdash;<q>they show the
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
work of the law written in their hearts.</q></emph> Therefore even the heathen are <emph><q>without excuse</q> (Rom. 1:20)</emph>.
There are two books: Nature and Scripture&mdash;one written, the other unwritten: and
there is need of studying both. On the passages in Romans, see the Commentary of
Hodge.
</p>

<p>
Spurgeon told of a godly person who, when sailing down the Rhine, closed his eyes,
lest the beauty of the scene should divert his mind from spiritual themes. The Puritan
turned away from the moss-rose, saying that he would count nothing on earth lovely.
But this is to despise God's works. J. H. Barrows: <q>The Himalayas are the raised
letters upon which we blind children put our fingers to spell out the name of God.</q>
To despise the works of God is to despise God himself. God is present in nature, and
is now speaking. <emph>Ps. 19:1&mdash;<q>The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament showeth his handiwork</q></emph>&mdash;present
tenses. Nature is not so much a <emph>book</emph>, as a <emph>voice</emph>. Hutton, Essays, 2:236&mdash;<q>The
direct knowledge of spiritual communion must be supplemented by knowledge
of God's ways gained from the study of nature. To neglect the study of the natural
mysteries of the universe leads to an arrogant and illicit intrusion of moral and spiritual
assumptions into a different world. This is the lesson of the book of Job.</q> Hatch,
Hibbert Lectures, 85&mdash;<q>Man, the servant and interpreter of nature, is also, and is
thereby, the servant and interpreter of the living God.</q> Books of science are the
record of man's past interpretations of God's works.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Natural theology supplemented.&mdash;The Christian revelation is the
chief source of theology. The Scriptures plainly declare that the revelation
of God in nature does not supply all the knowledge which a sinner
needs (Acts 17:23; Eph. 3:9). This revelation is therefore supplemented
by another, in which divine attributes and merciful provisions only dimly
shadowed forth in nature are made known to men. This latter revelation
consists of a series of supernatural events and communications, the
record of which is presented in the Scriptures.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Acts 17:23</emph>&mdash;Paul shows that, though the Athenians, in the erection of an altar to an
unknown God, <q>acknowledged a divine existence beyond any which the ordinary rites
of their worship recognized, that Being was still unknown to them; they had no just
conception of his nature and perfections</q> (Hackett, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>). <emph>Eph. 3:9&mdash;<q>the mystery which
hath been hid in God</q></emph>&mdash;this mystery is in the gospel made known for man's salvation.
Hegel, in his Philosophy of Religion, says that Christianity is the only revealed religion,
because the Christian God is the only one from whom a revelation can come. We may
add that as science is the record of man's progressive interpretation of God's revelation
in the realm of nature, so Scripture is the record of man's progressive interpretation
of God's revelation in the realm of spirit. The phrase <emph><q>word of God</q></emph> does not primarily
denote a <emph>record</emph>,&mdash;it is the <emph>spoken</emph> word, the <emph>doctrine</emph>, the vitalizing <emph>truth</emph>, disclosed
by Christ; see <emph>Mat. 13:19&mdash;<q>heareth the word of the kingdom</q></emph>; <emph>Luke 5:1&mdash;<q>heard the word of God</q></emph>; <emph>Acts 8:25&mdash;<q>spoken
the word of the Lord</q></emph>; <emph>13:48, 49&mdash;<q>glorified the word of God: ... the word of the Lord was
spread abroad</q></emph>; <emph>19:10, 20&mdash;<q>heard the word of the Lord, ... mightily grew the word of the Lord</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor.
1:18&mdash;<q>the word of the cross</q></emph>&mdash;all designating not a document, but an unwritten word; <emph><hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi>
Jer. 1:4&mdash;<q>the word of Jehovah came unto me</q></emph>; <emph>Ez. 1:3&mdash;<q>the word of Jehovah came expressly unto Ezekiel,
the priest.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The Scriptures the final standard of appeal.&mdash;Science and Scripture
throw light upon each other. The same divine Spirit who gave both revelations
is still present, enabling the believer to interpret the one by the
other and thus progressively to come to the knowledge of the truth.
Because of our finiteness and sin, the total record in Scripture of God's past
communications is a more trustworthy source of theology than are our
conclusions from nature or our private impressions of the teaching of the
Spirit. Theology therefore looks to the Scripture itself as its chief source
of material and its final standard of appeal.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
There is an internal work of the divine Spirit by which the outer word is made an
inner word, and its truth and power are manifested to the heart. Scripture represents
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
this work of the Spirit, not as a giving of new truth, but as an illumination of the mind
to perceive the fulness of meaning which lay wrapped up in the truth already revealed.
Christ is <emph><q>the truth</q> (John 14:6)</emph>; <emph><q>in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hidden</q> (Col. 2:3)</emph>;
the Holy Spirit, Jesus says, <emph><q>shall take of mine, and shall declare it unto you</q> (John 16:14)</emph>. The
incarnation and the Cross express the heart of God and the secret of the universe; all
discoveries in theology are but the unfolding of truth involved in these facts. The
Spirit of Christ enables us to compare nature with Scripture, and Scripture with
nature, and to correct mistakes in interpreting the one by light gained from the other.
Because the church as a whole, by which we mean the company of true believers in all
lands and ages, has the promise that it shall be guided <emph><q>into all the truth</q> (John 16:13)</emph>, we
may confidently expect the progress of Christian doctrine.
</p>

<p>
Christian experience is sometimes regarded as an original source of religious truth.
Experience, however, is but a testing and proving of the truth objectively contained
in God's revelation. The word <q>experience</q> is derived from <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>experior</foreign>, to test, to try.
Christian consciousness is not <q>norma normans,</q> but <q>norma normata.</q> Light, like
life, comes to us through the mediation of others. Yet the first comes from God as
really as the last, of which without hesitation we say: <q>God made me,</q> though we
have human parents. As I get through the service-pipe in my house the same water
which is stored in the reservoir upon the hillside, so in the Scriptures I get the same
truth which the Holy Spirit originally communicated to prophets and apostles. Calvin,
Institutes, book I, chap. 7&mdash;<q>As nature has an immediate manifestation of God in
conscience, a mediate in his works, so revelation has an immediate manifestation of God
in the Spirit, a mediate in the Scriptures.</q> <q>Man's nature,</q> said Spurgeon, <q>is not
an organized lie, yet his inner consciousness has been warped by sin, and though once
it was an infallible guide to truth and duty, sin has made it very deceptive. The
standard of infallibility is not in man's consciousness, but in the Scriptures. When
consciousness in any matter is contrary to the word of God, we must know that it is
not God's voice within us, but the devil's.</q> Dr. George A. Gordon says that <q>Christian
history is a revelation of Christ additional to that contained in the New Testament.</q>
Should we not say <q>illustrative,</q> instead of <q>additional</q>? On the relation between
Christian experience and Scripture, see Stearns, Evidence of Christian Experience, 286-309:
Twesten, Dogmatik, 1:344-348; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 1:15.
</p>

<p>
H. H. Bawden: <q>God is the ultimate authority, but there are delegated authorities,
such as family, state, church; instincts, feelings, conscience; the general experience of
the race, traditions, utilities; revelation in nature and in Scripture. But the highest
authority available for men in morals and religion is the truth concerning Christ contained
in the Christian Scriptures. What the truth concerning Christ <emph>is</emph>, is determined
by: (1) the human reason, conditioned by a right attitude of the feelings and the will;
(2) in the light of all the truth derived from nature, including man; (3) in the light of
the history of Christianity; (4) in the light of the origin and development of the
Scriptures themselves. The authority of the generic reason and the authority of
the Bible are co-relative, since they both have been developed in the providence of
God, and since the latter is in large measure but the reflection of the former. This
view enables us to hold a rational conception of the function of the Scripture in
religion. This view, further, enables us to rationalize what is called the inspiration of
the Bible, the nature and extent of inspiration, the Bible as history&mdash;a record of the
historic unfolding of revelation; the Bible as literature&mdash;a compend of life-principles,
rather than a book of rules; the Bible Christocentric&mdash;an incarnation of the
divine thought and will in human thought and language.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The theology of Scripture not unnatural.&mdash;Though we speak of
the systematized truths of nature as constituting natural theology, we are
not to infer that Scriptural theology is unnatural. Since the Scriptures
have the same author as nature, the same principles are illustrated in the
one as in the other. All the doctrines of the Bible have their reason in
that same nature of God which constitutes the basis of all material things.
Christianity is a supplementary dispensation, not as contradicting, or correcting
errors in, natural theology, but as more perfectly revealing the
truth. Christianity is indeed the ground-plan upon which the whole
creation is built&mdash;the original and eternal truth of which natural theology
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
is but a partial expression. Hence the theology of nature and the theology
of Scripture are mutually dependent. Natural theology not only prepares
the way for, but it receives stimulus and aid from, Scriptural
theology. Natural theology may now be a source of truth, which, before
the Scriptures came, it could not furnish.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity. 23&mdash;<q>There is no such thing as a natural
religion or religion of reason distinct from revealed religion. Christianity is more
profoundly, more comprehensively, rational, more accordant with the deepest principles
of human nature and human thought than is natural religion; or, as we may put
it, Christianity is natural religion elevated and transmuted into revealed.</q> Peabody,
Christianity the Religion of Nature, lecture 2&mdash;<q>Revelation is the unveiling, uncovering
of what previously existed, and it excludes the idea of newness, invention, creation....
The revealed religion of earth is the natural religion of heaven.</q> Compare
<emph>Rev. 13:8&mdash;<q>the Lamb that hath been slain from the foundation of the world</q></emph> = the coming of Christ was
no make-shift; in a true sense the Cross existed in eternity; the atonement is a revelation
of an eternal fact in the being of God.
</p>

<p>
Note Plato's illustration of the cave which can be easily threaded by one who has
previously entered it with a torch. Nature is the dim light from the cave's mouth;
the torch is Scripture. Kant to Jacobi, in Jacobi's Werke, 3:523&mdash;<q>If the gospel had
not previously taught the universal moral laws, reason would not yet have obtained
so perfect an insight into them.</q> Alexander McLaren: <q>Non-Christian thinkers now
talk eloquently about God's love, and even reject the gospel in the name of that love,
thus kicking down the ladder by which they have climbed. But it was the Cross that
taught the world the love of God, and apart from the death of Christ men may hope
that there is a heart at the centre of the universe, but they can never be sure of it.</q>
The parrot fancies that he taught men to talk. So Mr. Spencer fancies that he
invented ethics. He is only using the twilight, after his sun has gone down. Dorner,
Hist. Prot. Theol., 252, 253&mdash;<q>Faith, at the Reformation, first gave scientific certainty;
it had God sure: hence it proceeded to banish scepticism in philosophy and science.</q>
See also Dove, Logic of Christian Faith, 333; Bowen, Metaph. and Ethics, 442-463;
Bib. Sac., 1874:436; A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 226, 227.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Scripture and Rationalism.</head>

<p>
Although the Scriptures make known
much that is beyond the power of man's unaided reason to discover or
fully to comprehend, their teachings, when taken together, in no way contradict
a reason conditioned in its activity by a holy affection and enlightened
by the Spirit of God. To reason in the large sense, as including the
mind's power of cognizing God and moral relations&mdash;not in the narrow
sense of mere reasoning, or the exercise of the purely logical faculty&mdash;the
Scriptures continually appeal.
</p>

<p>
A. The proper office of reason, in this large sense, is: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) To furnish
us with those primary ideas of space, time, cause, substance, design, right,
and God, which are the conditions of all subsequent knowledge. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) To
judge with regard to man's need of a special and supernatural revelation.
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) To examine the credentials of communications professing to be, or of
documents professing to record, such a revelation. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) To estimate and
reduce to system the facts of revelation, when these have been found properly
attested. (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) To deduce from these facts their natural and logical
conclusions. Thus reason itself prepares the way for a revelation above
reason, and warrants an implicit trust in such revelation when once given.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Dove, Logic of the Christian Faith, 318&mdash;<q>Reason terminates in the proposition:
Look for revelation.</q> Leibnitz: <q>Revelation is the viceroy who first presents his credentials
to the provincial assembly (reason), and then himself presides.</q> Reason can
recognize truth after it is made known, as for example in the demonstrations of geometry,
although it could never discover that truth for itself. See Calderwood's illustration
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
of the party lost in the woods, who wisely take the course indicated by one at the
tree-top with a larger view than their own (Philosophy of the Infinite, 126). The novice
does well to trust his guide in the forest, at least till he learns to recognise for himself
the marks blazed upon the trees. Luthardt, Fund. Truths, lect. viii&mdash;<q>Reason
could never have invented a self-humiliating God, cradled in a manger and dying on a
cross.</q> Lessing, Zur Geschichte und Litteratur, 6:134&mdash;<q>What is the meaning of a
revelation that reveals nothing?</q>
</p>

<p>
Ritschl denies the presuppositions of any theology based on the Bible as the infallible
word of God on the one hand, and on the validity of the knowledge of God as
obtained by scientific and philosophic processes on the other. Because philosophers,
scientists, and even exegetes, are not agreed among themselves, he concludes that no
trustworthy results are attainable by human reason. We grant that reason without
love will fall into many errors with regard to God, and that faith is therefore the organ
by which religious truth is to be apprehended. But we claim that this faith includes
reason, and is itself reason in its highest form. Faith criticizes and judges the processes
of natural science as well as the contents of Scripture. But it also recognizes in
science and Scripture prior workings of that same Spirit of Christ which is the source
and authority of the Christian life. Ritschl ignores Christ's world-relations and therefore
secularizes and disparages science and philosophy. The faith to which he trusts as
the source of theology is unwarrantably sundered from reason. It becomes a subjective
and arbitrary standard, to which even the teaching of Scripture must yield precedence.
We hold on the contrary, that there are ascertained results in science and in
philosophy, as well as in the interpretation of Scripture as a whole, and that these
results constitute an authoritative revelation. See Orr, The Theology of Ritschl; Dorner,
Hist. Prot. Theol., 1:233&mdash;<q>The unreasonable in the empirical reason is taken
captive by faith, which is the nascent true reason that despairs of itself and trustfully
lays hold of objective Christianity.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Rationalism, on the other hand, holds reason to be the ultimate
source of all religious truth, while Scripture is authoritative only so far as its
revelations agree with previous conclusions of reason, or can be rationally
demonstrated. Every form of rationalism, therefore, commits at least one
of the following errors: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That of confounding reason with mere reasoning,
or the exercise of the logical intelligence. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That of ignoring
the necessity of a holy affection as the condition of all right reason in
religious things. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That of denying our dependence in our present state
of sin upon God's past revelations of himself. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) That of regarding the
unaided reason, even its normal and unbiased state, as capable of discovering,
comprehending, and demonstrating all religious truth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Reason must not be confounded with ratiocination, or mere reasoning. Shall we follow
reason? Yes, but not individual reasoning, against the testimony of those who
are better informed than we; nor by insisting on demonstration, where probable evidence
alone is possible; nor by trusting solely to the evidence of the senses, when
spiritual things are in question. Coleridge, in replying to those who argued that all
knowledge comes to us from the senses, says: <q>At any rate we must bring to all facts
the light in which we see them.</q> This the Christian does. The light of love reveals
much that would otherwise be invisible. Wordsworth, Excursion, book 5 (598)&mdash;<q>The
mind's repose On evidence is not to be ensured By act of naked reason. Moral truth
Is no mechanic structure, built by rule.</q>
</p>

<p>
Rationalism is the mathematical theory of knowledge. Spinoza's Ethics is an illustration
of it. It would deduce the universe from an axiom. Dr. Hodge very wrongly
described rationalism as <q>an overuse of reason.</q> It is rather the use of an abnormal,
perverted, improperly conditioned reason; see Hodge, Syst. Theol., 1:34, 39, 55, and
criticism by Miller, in his Fetich in Theology. The phrase <q>sanctified intellect</q> means
simply intellect accompanied by right affections toward God, and trained to work
under their influence. Bishop Butler: <q>Let reason be kept to, but let not such poor
creatures as we are go on objecting to an infinite scheme that we do not see the necessity
or usefulness of all its parts, and call that reasoning.</q> Newman Smyth, Death's
Place in Evolution, 86&mdash;<q>Unbelief is a shaft sunk down into the darkness of the earth.
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
Drive the shaft deep enough, and it would come out into the sunlight on the earth's
other side.</q> The most unreasonable people in the world are those who depend solely
upon reason, in the narrow sense. <q>The better to exalt reason, they make the world
irrational.</q> <q>The hen that has hatched ducklings walks with them to the water's edge,
but there she stops, and she is amazed when they go on. So reason stops and faith goes
on, finding its proper element in the invisible. Reason is the feet that stand on solid
earth; faith is the wings that enable us to fly; and normal man is a creature with
wings.</q> Compare γνῶσις (<emph>1 Tim. 6:20&mdash;<q>the knowledge which is falsely so called</q></emph>) with ἐπίγνωσις
(<emph>2 Pet. 1:2&mdash;<q>the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord</q></emph> = full knowledge, or true knowledge).
See Twesten, Dogmatik, 1:467-500; Julius Müller, Proof-texts, 4, 5; Mansel, Limits
of Religious Thought, 96; Dawson, Modern Ideas of Evolution.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. Scripture and Mysticism.</head>

<p>
As rationalism recognizes too little as
coming from God, so mysticism recognizes too much.
</p>

<p>
A. True mysticism.&mdash;We have seen that there is an illumination of the
minds of all believers by the Holy Spirit. The Spirit, however, makes no
new revelation of truth, but uses for his instrument the truth already
revealed by Christ in nature and in the Scriptures. The illuminating
work of the Spirit is therefore an opening of men's minds to understand
Christ's previous revelations. As one initiated into the mysteries of Christianity,
every true believer may be called a mystic. True mysticism is
that higher knowledge and fellowship which the Holy Spirit gives through
the use of nature and Scripture as subordinate and principal means.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Mystic</q> = one initiated, from μύω, <q>to close the eyes</q>&mdash;probably in order that the
soul may have inward vision of truth. But divine truth is a <q>mystery,</q> not only as
something into which one must be initiated, but as ὑπερβάλλουσα τῆς γνώσεως (<emph>Eph. 3:19</emph>)&mdash;surpassing
full knowledge, even to the believer; see Meyer on <emph>Rom. 11:25&mdash;<q>I would not,
brethren, have you ignorant of this mystery.</q></emph> The Germans have <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Mystik</foreign> with a favorable sense,
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Mysticismus</foreign> with an unfavorable sense,&mdash;corresponding respectively to our true and
false mysticism. True mysticism is intimated in <emph>John 16:13&mdash;<q>the spirit of truth ... shall
guide you into all the truth</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 3:9&mdash;<q>dispensation of the mystery</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 2:10&mdash;<q>unto us God revealed
them through the Spirit.</q></emph> Nitzsch, Syst. of Christ. Doct., 35&mdash;<q>Whenever true religion
revives, there is an outcry against mysticism, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, higher knowledge, fellowship, activity
through the Spirit of God in the heart.</q> Compare the charge against Paul that he
was mad, in <emph>Acts 26:24, 25</emph>, with his self-vindication in <emph>2 Cor. 5:13&mdash;<q>whether we are beside ourselves,
it is unto God.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
Inge, Christian Mysticism, 21&mdash;<q>Harnack speaks of mysticism as rationalism applied
to a sphere above reason. He should have said reason applied to a sphere above rationalism.
Its fundamental doctrine is the unity of all existence. Man can realize his individuality
only by transcending it and finding himself in the larger unity of God's
being. Man is a microcosm. He recapitulates the race, the universe, Christ himself.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 5&mdash;Mysticism is <q>the attempt to realize in thought and feeling the immanence of
the temporal in the eternal, and of the eternal in the temporal. It implies (1) that
the soul can see and perceive spiritual truth; (2) that man, in order to know God, must
be a partaker of the divine nature; (3) that without holiness no man can see the Lord;
(4) that the true hierophant of the mysteries of God is love. The <q>scala perfectionis</q>
is (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) the purgative life; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the illuminative life; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the unitive life.</q> Stevens,
Johannine Theology, 239, 240&mdash;<q>The mysticism of John ... is not a subjective mysticism
which absorbs the soul in self-contemplation and revery, but an objective and
rational mysticism, which lives in a world of realities, apprehends divinely revealed
truth, and bases its experience upon it. It is a mysticism which feeds, not upon its own
feelings and fancies, but upon Christ. It involves an acceptance of him, and a life of
obedience to him. Its motto is: Abiding in Christ.</q> As the power press cannot dispense
with the type, so the Spirit of God does not dispense with Christ's external revelations
in nature and in Scripture. E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 364&mdash;<q>The word
of God is a form or mould, into which the Holy Spirit delivers us when he creates us
anew</q>; <emph><hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Rom. 6:17&mdash;<q>ye became obedient from the heart to that form of teaching whereunto ye were
delivered.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>

<p>
B. False mysticism.&mdash;Mysticism, however, as the term is commonly
used, errs in holding to the attainment of religious knowledge by direct
communication from God, and by passive absorption of the human activities
into the divine. It either partially or wholly loses sight of (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) the outward
organs of revelation, nature and the Scriptures; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the activity of
the human powers in the reception of all religious knowledge; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the
personality of man, and, by consequence, the personality of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In opposition to false mysticism, we are to remember that the Holy Spirit works
through the truth externally revealed in nature and in Scripture (<emph>Acts 14:17&mdash;<q>he left
not himself without witness</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 1:20&mdash;<q>the invisible things of him since the creation of the world are clearly
seen</q></emph>; <emph>Acts 7:51&mdash;<q>ye do always resist the Holy Spirit: as your fathers did, so do ye</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 6:17&mdash;<q>the
sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God</q></emph>). By this truth already given we are to test all new
communications which would contradict or supersede it (<emph>1 John 4:1&mdash;<q>believe not every
spirit, but prove the spirits, whether they are of God</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 5:10&mdash;<q>proving what is well pleasing unto the Lord</q></emph>).
By these tests we may try Spiritualism, Mormonism, Swedenborgianism. Note the
mystical tendency in Francis de Sales, Thomas à Kempis, Madame Guyon, Thomas C.
Upham. These writers seem at times to advocate an unwarrantable abnegation of our
reason and will, and a <q>swallowing up of man in God.</q> But Christ does not deprive us
of reason and will; he only takes from us the perverseness of our reason and the selfishness
of our will; so reason and will are restored to their normal clearness and
strength. Compare <emph>Ps. 16:7&mdash;<q>Jehovah, who hath given me counsel; yea, my heart instructeth me in the
night seasons</q></emph>&mdash;God teaches his people through the exercise of their own faculties.
</p>

<p>
False mysticism is sometimes present though unrecognized. All expectation of
results without the use of means partakes of it. Martineau, Seat of Authority, 288&mdash;<q>The
lazy will would like to have the vision while the eye that apprehends it sleeps.</q>
Preaching without preparation is like throwing ourselves down from a pinnacle of the
temple and depending on God to send an angel to hold us up. Christian Science would
trust to supernatural agencies, while casting aside the natural agencies God has
already provided; as if a drowning man should trust to prayer while refusing to seize
the rope. Using Scripture <q>ad aperturam libri</q> is like guiding one's actions by a
throw of the dice. Allen, Jonathan Edwards, 171, note&mdash;<q>Both Charles and John
Wesley were agreed in accepting the Moravian method of solving doubts as to some
course of action by opening the Bible at hazard and regarding the passage on which
the eye first alighted as a revelation of God's will in the matter</q>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Wedgwood, Life
of Wesley, 193; Southey, Life of Wesley, 1:216. J. G. Paton, Life, 2:74&mdash;<q>After many
prayers and wrestlings and tears, I went alone before the Lord, and on my knees cast
lots, with a solemn appeal to God, and the answer came: <q>Go home!</q></q> He did this
only once in his life, in overwhelming perplexity, and finding no light from human
counsel. <q>To whomsoever this faith is given,</q> he says, <q>let him obey it.</q>
</p>

<p>
F. B. Meyer, Christian Living, 18&mdash;<q>It is a mistake to seek a sign from heaven; to
run from counsellor to counsellor; to cast a lot; or to trust in some chance coincidence.
Not that God may not reveal his will thus; but because it is hardly the behavior
of a child with its Father. There is a more excellent way,</q>&mdash;namely, appropriate
Christ who is wisdom, and then go forward, sure that we shall be guided, as each new
step must be taken, or word spoken, or decision made. Our service is to be <emph><q>rational service</q>
(Rom. 12:1)</emph>; blind and arbitrary action is inconsistent with the spirit of Christianity.
Such action makes us victims of temporary feeling and a prey to Satanic deception.
In cases of perplexity, waiting for light and waiting upon God will commonly
enable us to make an intelligent decision, while <emph><q>whatsoever is not of faith is sin</q> (Rom. 14:23)</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<q>False mysticism reached its logical result in the Buddhistic theosophy. In that system
man becomes most divine in the extinction of his own personality. Nirvana is
reached by the eightfold path of right view, aspiration, speech, conduct, livelihood,
effort, mindfulness, rapture; and Nirvana is the loss of ability to say: <q>This is I,</q> and
<q>This is mine.</q> Such was Hypatia's attempt, by subjection of self, to be wafted away
into the arms of Jove. George Eliot was wrong when she said: <q>The happiest woman
has no history.</q> Self-denial is not self-effacement. The cracked bell has no individuality.
In Christ we become our complete selves.</q> <emph>Col 2:9, 10&mdash;<q>For in him dwelleth all the fulness
of the Godhead bodily, and in him ye are made full.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
Royce, World and Individual, 2:248, 249&mdash;<q>Assert the spiritual man; abnegate the
natural man. The fleshly self is the root of all evil; the spiritual self belongs to a
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
higher realm. But this spiritual self lies at first outside the soul; it becomes ours only
by grace. Plato rightly made the eternal Ideas the source of all human truth and
goodness. Wisdom comes into a man, like Aristotle's νοῦς.</q> A. H. Bradford, The
Inner Light, in making the direct teaching of the Holy Spirit the sufficient if not the
sole source of religious knowledge, seems to us to ignore the principle of evolution in
religion. God builds upon the past. His revelation to prophets and apostles constitutes
the norm and corrective of our individual experience, even while our experience
throws new light upon that revelation. On Mysticism, true and false, see Inge, Christian
Mysticism, 4, 5, 11; Stearns, Evidence of Christian Experience, 289-294; Dorner,
Geschichte d. prot. Theol., 48-59, 243; Herzog, Encycl., art.: Mystik, by Lange; Vaughan,
Hours with the Mystics, 1:199; Morell, Hist. Philos., 58, 191-215, 556-625, 726; Hodge,
Syst. Theol., 1:61-69, 97, 104; Fleming, Vocab. Philos., <hi rend='italic'>in voce</hi>; Tholuck, Introd. to
Blüthensammlung aus der morgenländischen Mystik; William James, Varieties of
Religious Experience, 379-429.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>4. Scripture and Romanism.</head>

<p>
While the history of doctrine, as showing
the progressive apprehension and unfolding by the church of the truth
contained in nature and Scripture, is a subordinate source of theology,
Protestantism recognizes the Bible as under Christ the primary and final
authority.
</p>

<p>
Romanism, on the other hand, commits the two-fold error (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Of making
the church, and not the Scriptures, the immediate and sufficient source of
religious knowledge; and (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Of making the relation of the individual to
Christ depend upon his relation to the church, instead of making his relation
to the church depend upon, follow, and express his relation to Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In Roman Catholicism there is a mystical element. The Scriptures are not the complete
or final standard of belief and practice. God gives to the world from time to
time, through popes and councils, new communications of truth. Cyprian: <q>He who
has not the church for his mother, has not God for his Father.</q> Augustine: <q>I would
not believe the Scripture, unless the authority of the church also influenced me.</q>
Francis of Assisi and Ignatius Loyola both represented the truly obedient person as
one dead, moving only as moved by his superior; the true Christian has no life of his
own, but is the blind instrument of the church. John Henry Newman, Tracts, Theol.
and Eccl., 287&mdash;<q>The Christian dogmas were in the church from the time of the
apostles,&mdash;they were ever in their substance what they are now.</q> But this is demonstrably
untrue of the immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary; of the treasury of
merits to be distributed in indulgences; of the infallibility of the pope (see Gore,
Incarnation, 186). In place of the true doctrine, <q>Ubi Spiritus, ibi ecclesia,</q> Romanism
substitutes her maxim, <q>Ubi ecclesia, ibi Spiritus.</q> Luther saw in this the principle
of mysticism, when he said: <q>Papatus est merus enthusiasmus.</q> See Hodge,
Syst. Theol., 1:61-69.
</p>

<p>
In reply to the Romanist argument that the church was before the Bible, and that
the same body that gave the truth at the first can make additions to that truth, we say
that the unwritten word was before the church and made the church possible. The
word of God existed before it was written down, and by that word the first disciples as
well as the latest were begotten (<emph>1 Pet. 1:23&mdash;<q>begotten again ... through the word of God</q></emph>).
The grain of truth in Roman Catholic doctrine is expressed in <emph>1 Tim. 3:15&mdash;<q>the church of
the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth</q></emph> = the church is God's appointed proclaimer of
truth; <emph><hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Phil. 2:16&mdash;<q>holding forth the word of life.</q></emph> But the church can proclaim the truth,
only as it is built upon the truth. So we may say that the American Republic is the
pillar and ground of liberty in the world; but this is true only so far as the Republic is
built upon the principle of liberty as its foundation. When the Romanist asks: <q>Where
was your church before Luther?</q> the Protestant may reply: <q>Where yours is not now&mdash;in
the word of God. Where was your face before it was washed? Where was the
fine flour before the wheat went to the mill?</q> Lady Jane Grey, three days before her
execution, February 12, 1554, said: <q>I ground my faith on God's word, and not upon
the church; for, if the church be a good church, the faith of the church must be tried
by God's word, and not God's word by the church, nor yet my faith.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Roman church would keep men in perpetual childhood&mdash;coming to her for truth
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
instead of going directly to the Bible; <q>like the foolish mother who keeps her boy pining
in the house lest he stub his toe, and would love best to have him remain a babe forever,
that she might mother him still.</q> Martensen, Christian Dogmatics, 30&mdash;<q>Romanism
is so busy in building up a system of guarantees, that she forgets the truth of Christ
which she would guarantee.</q> George Herbert: <q>What wretchedness can give him any
room, Whose house is foul while he adores his broom!</q> It is a semi-parasitic doctrine
of safety without intelligence or spirituality. Romanism says: <q>Man for the machine!</q>
Protestantism: <q>The machine for man!</q> Catholicism strangles, Protestantism restores,
individuality. Yet the Romanist principle sometimes appears in so-called Protestant
churches. The Catechism published by the League of the Holy Cross, in the Anglican
Church, contains the following: <q>It is to the priest only that the child must acknowledge
his sins, if he desires that God should forgive him. Do you know why? It is
because God, when on earth, gave to his priests and to them alone the power of forgiving
sins. Go to the priest, who is the doctor of your soul, and who cures you in the
name of God.</q> But this contradicts <emph>John 10:7</emph>&mdash;where Christ says <emph><q>I am the door</q></emph>; and
<emph>1 Cor. 3:11&mdash;<q>other foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ</q></emph> = Salvation is
attained by immediate access to Christ, and there is no door between the soul and
him. See Dorner, Gesch. prot. Theol., 227; Schleiermacher, Glaubenslehre, 1:24; Robinson,
in Mad. Av. Lectures, 387; Fisher, Nat. and Method of Revelation, 10; Watkins,
Bampton Lect. for 1890:149; Drummond, Nat. Law in Spir. World, 327.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Limitations of Theology.</head>

<p>
Although theology derives its material
from God's two-fold revelation, it does not profess to give an exhaustive
knowledge of God and of the relations between God and the universe.
After showing what material we have, we must show what material we have
not. We have indicated the sources of theology; we now examine its limitations.
Theology has its limitations:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>In the finiteness of the human understanding.</hi> This gives rise
to a class of necessary mysteries, or mysteries connected with the infinity
and incomprehensibleness of the divine nature (Job 11:7; Rom. 11:33).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Job 11:7&mdash;<q>Canst thou by searching find out God? Canst thou find out the Almighty to perfection?</q></emph> <emph>Rom. 11:33&mdash;<q>how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!</q></emph> Every doctrine, therefore,
has its inexplicable side. Here is the proper meaning of Tertullian's sayings: <q>Certum
est, quia impossible est: quo absurdius, eo verius</q>; that of Anselm: <q>Credo,
ut intelligam</q>; and that of Abelard: <q>Qui credit cito, levis corde est.</q> Drummond,
Nat. Law in Spir. World: <q>A science without mystery is unknown; a religion without
mystery is absurd.</q> E. G. Robinson: <q>A finite being cannot grasp even its own relations
to the Infinite.</q> Hovey, Manual of Christ. Theol., 7&mdash;<q>To infer from the perfection
of God that all his works [nature, man, inspiration] will be absolutely and
unchangeably perfect: to infer from the perfect love of God that there can be no sin
or suffering in the world; to infer from the sovereignty of God that man is not a free
moral agent;&mdash;all these inferences are rash; they are inferences from the cause to the
effect, while the cause is imperfectly known.</q> See Calderwood, Philos. of Infinite,
491; Sir Wm. Hamilton, Discussions, 22.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>In the imperfect state of science, both natural and metaphysical.</hi>
This gives rise to a class of accidental mysteries, or mysteries which
consist in the apparently irreconcilable nature of truths, which, taken
separately, are perfectly comprehensible.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We are the victims of a mental or moral astigmatism, which sees a <emph>single</emph> point of
truth as <emph>two</emph>. We see God and man, divine sovereignty and human freedom, Christ's
divine nature and Christ's human nature, the natural and the supernatural, respectively,
as two disconnected facts, when perhaps deeper insight would see but one.
Astronomy has its centripetal and centrifugal forces, yet they are doubtless one force.
The child cannot hold two oranges at once in its little hand. Negro preacher: <q>You
can't carry two watermelons under one arm.</q> Shakespeare, Antony and Cleopatra,
1:2&mdash;<q>In nature's infinite book of secresy, A little I can read.</q> Cooke, Credentials of
Science, 34&mdash;<q>Man's progress in knowledge has been so constantly and rapidly accelerated
that more has been gained during the lifetime of men still living than during all
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
human history before.</q> And yet we may say with D'Arcy, Idealism and Theology, 248&mdash;<q>Man's
position in the universe is eccentric. God alone is at the centre. To him
alone is the orbit of truth completely displayed.... There are circumstances in
which to us the onward movement of truth may seem a retrogression.</q> William Watson,
Collected Poems, 271&mdash;<q>Think not thy wisdom can illume away The ancient tanglement
of night and day. Enough to acknowledge both, and both revere: They see
not clearliest who see all things clear.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>In the inadequacy of language.</hi> Since language is the medium
through which truth is expressed and formulated, the invention of a proper
terminology in theology, as in every other science, is a condition and
criterion of its progress. The Scriptures recognize a peculiar difficulty in
putting spiritual truths into earthly language (1 Cor. 2:13; 2 Cor. 3:6;
12:4).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>1 Cor. 2:13&mdash;<q>not in words which man's wisdom teacheth</q></emph>; <emph>2 Cor. 3:6&mdash;<q>the letter killeth</q></emph>; <emph>12:4&mdash;<q>unspeakable
words.</q></emph> God submits to conditions of revelation; <emph><hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> John 16:12&mdash;<q>I have yet
many things to say into you, but ye cannot bear them now.</q></emph> Language has to be created. Words
have to be taken from a common, and to be put to a larger and more sacred, use, so
that they <q>stagger under their weight of meaning</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, the word <emph><q>day,</q></emph> in <emph>Genesis 1</emph>,
and the word ἀγάπη in <emph>1 Cor. 13</emph>. See Gould, in Amer. Com., on <emph>1 Cor. 13:12&mdash;<q>now we see in
a mirror, darkly</q></emph>&mdash;in a metallic mirror whose surface is dim and whose images are
obscure = Now we behold Christ, the truth, only as he is reflected in imperfect speech&mdash;<emph><q>but
then face to face</q></emph> = immediately, without the intervention of an imperfect
medium. <q>As fast as we tunnel into the sandbank of thought, the stones of language
must be built into walls and arches, to allow further progress into the boundless mine.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>In the incompleteness of our knowledge of the Scriptures.</hi>
Since it is not the mere letter of the Scriptures that constitutes the truth,
the progress of theology is dependent upon hermeneutics, or the interpretation
of the word of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Notice the progress in commenting, from homiletical to grammatical, historical, dogmatic,
illustrated in Scott, Ellicott, Stanley, Lightfoot. John Robinson: <q>I am verily
persuaded that the Lord hath more truth yet to break forth from his holy word.</q>
Recent criticism has shown the necessity of studying each portion of Scripture in the
light of its origin and connections. There has been an evolution of Scripture, as truly
as there has been an evolution of natural science, and the Spirit of Christ who was in
the prophets has brought about a progress from germinal and typical expression to
expression that is complete and clear. Yet we still need to offer the prayer of <emph>Ps. 119:18&mdash;<q>Open
thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.</q></emph> On New Testament Interpretation,
see A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion, 334-336.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>In the silence of written revelation.</hi> For our discipline and probation,
much is probably hidden from us, which we might even with our
present powers comprehend.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Instance the silence of Scripture with regard to the life and death of Mary the Virgin,
the personal appearance of Jesus and his occupations in early life, the origin of
evil, the method of the atonement, the state after death. So also as to social and political
questions, such as slavery, the liquor traffic, domestic virtues, governmental corruption.
<q>Jesus was in heaven at the revolt of the angels, yet he tells us little about
angels or about heaven. He does not discourse about Eden, or Adam, or the fall of
man, or death as the result of Adam's sin; and he says little of departed spirits, whether
they are lost or saved.</q> It was better to inculcate principles, and trust his followers
to apply them. His gospel is not intended to gratify a vain curiosity. He would
not divert men's minds from pursuing the one thing needful; <emph><hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Luke 13:23, 24&mdash;<q>Lord,
are they few that are saved? And he said unto them, Strive to enter in by the narrow door; for many, I say unto you,
shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able.</q></emph> Paul's silence upon speculative questions which he
must have pondered with absorbing interest is a proof of his divine inspiration. John
Foster spent his life, <q>gathering questions for eternity</q>; <emph><hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> John 13:7&mdash;<q>What I do thou
knowest not now; but thou shalt understand hereafter.</q></emph> The most beautiful thing in a countenance
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
is that which a picture can never express. He who would speak well must omit well.
Story: <q>Of every noble work the silent part is best; Of all expressions that which cannot
be expressed.</q> <emph><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> 1 Cor. 2:9&mdash;<q>Things which eye saw not, and ear heard not, And which entered not
into the heart of man, Whatsoever things God prepared for them that love him</q></emph>; <emph>Deut 29:29&mdash;<q>The secret things
belong unto Jehovah our God: but the things that are revealed belong unto us and to our children.</q></emph> For Luther's
view, see Hagenbach, Hist. Doctrine, 2:388. See also B. D. Thomas, The Secret of the
Divine Silence.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>In the lack of spiritual discernment caused by sin.</hi> Since holy
affection is a condition of religious knowledge, all moral imperfection in
the individual Christian and in the church serves as a hindrance to the
working out of a complete theology.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>John 3:3&mdash;<q>Except one be born anew, he cannot see the kingdom of God.</q></emph> The spiritual ages make
most progress in theology,&mdash;witness the half-century succeeding the Reformation,
and the half-century succeeding the great revival in New England in the time of Jonathan
Edwards. Ueberweg, Logic (Lindsay's transl.), 514&mdash;<q>Science is much under
the influence of the will; and the truth of knowledge depends upon the purity of the
conscience. The will has no power to resist scientific evidence; but scientific evidence
is not obtained without the continuous loyalty of the will.</q> Lord Bacon declared
that man cannot enter the kingdom of science, any more than he can enter the kingdom
of heaven, without becoming a little child. Darwin describes his own mind as
having become a kind of machine for grinding general laws out of large collections
of facts, with the result of producing <q>atrophy of that part of the brain on which the
higher tastes depend.</q> But a similar abnormal atrophy is possible in the case of the
moral and religious faculty (see Gore, Incarnation, 37). Dr. Allen said in his Introductory
Lecture at Lane Theological Seminary: <q>We are very glad to see you if you wish
to be students; but the professors' chairs are all filled.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Relations of Material to Progress in Theology.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>A perfect system of theology is impossible.</hi> We do not expect to
construct such a system. All science but reflects the present attainment
of the human mind. No science is complete or finished. However it
may be with the sciences of nature and of man, the science of God will
never amount to an exhaustive knowledge. We must not expect to demonstrate
all Scripture doctrines upon rational grounds, or even in every
case to see the principle of connection between them. Where we cannot
do this, we must, as in every other science, set the revealed facts in their
places and wait for further light, instead of ignoring or rejecting any of
them because we cannot understand them or their relation to other parts
of our system.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Three problems left unsolved by the Egyptians have been handed down to our generation:
(1) the duplication of the cube; (2) the trisection of the angle; (3) the
quadrature of the circle. Dr. Johnson: <q>Dictionaries are like watches; the worst is
better than none; and the best cannot be expected to go quite true.</q> Hood spoke of
Dr. Johnson's <q>Contradictionary,</q> which had both <q>interiour</q> and <q>exterior.</q> Sir
William Thompson (Lord Kelvin) at the fiftieth anniversary of his professorship
said: <q>One word characterizes the most strenuous of the efforts for the advancement
of science which I have made perseveringly through fifty-five years: that word is
<emph>failure</emph>; I know no more of electric and magnetic force, or of the relations between
ether, electricity and ponderable matter, or of chemical affinity, than I knew and
tried to teach my students of natural philosophy fifty years ago in my first session as
professor.</q> Allen, Religious Progress, mentions three tendencies. <q>The first says:
Destroy the new! The second says: Destroy the old! The third says: Destroy nothing!
Let the old gradually and quietly grow into the new, as Erasmus wished. We
should accept contradictions, whether they can be intellectually reconciled or not.
The truth has never prospered by enforcing some 'via media.' Truth lies rather in
the union of opposite propositions, as in Christ's divinity and humanity, and in grace
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
and freedom. Blanco White went from Rome to infidelity; Orestes Brownson from
infidelity to Rome; so the brothers John Henry Newman and Francis W. Newman,
and the brothers George Herbert of Bemerton and Lord Herbert of Cherbury. One
would secularize the divine, the other would divinize the secular. But if one is true,
so is the other. Let us adopt both. All progress is a deeper penetration into the
meaning of old truth, and a larger appropriation of it.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Theology is nevertheless progressive.</hi> It is progressive in the
sense that our subjective understanding of the facts with regard to God,
and our consequent expositions of these facts, may and do become more
perfect. But theology is not progressive in the sense that its objective
facts change, either in their number or their nature. With Martineau we
may say: <q>Religion has been reproached with not being progressive; it
makes amends by being imperishable.</q> Though our knowledge may be
imperfect, it will have great value still. Our success in constructing a
theology will depend upon the proportion which clearly expressed facts of
Scripture bear to mere inferences, and upon the degree in which they all
cohere about Christ, the central person and theme.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The progress of theology is progress in apprehension by man, not progress in communication
by God. Originality in astronomy is not man's creation of new planets,
but man's discovery of planets that were never seen before, or the bringing to light
of relations between them that were never before suspected. Robert Kerr Eccles:
<q>Originality is a habit of recurring to origins&mdash;the habit of securing personal experience
by personal application to original facts. It is not an eduction of novelties
either from nature, Scripture, or inner consciousness; it is rather the habit of resorting
to primitive facts, and of securing the personal experiences which arise from contact
with these facts.</q> Fisher, Nat. and Meth. of Revelation, 48&mdash;<q>The starry heavens are
now what they were of old; there is no enlargement of the stellar universe, except
that which comes through the increased power and use of the telescope.</q> We must
not imitate the green sailor who, when set to steer, said he had <q>sailed <emph>by</emph> that star.</q>
</p>

<p>
Martineau, Types, 1:492, 493&mdash;<q>Metaphysics, so far as they are true to their work,
are stationary, precisely because they have in charge, not what begins and ceases to
be, but what always <emph>is</emph>.... It is absurd to praise motion for always making way,
while disparaging space for still being what it ever was: as if the motion you prefer
could be, without the space which you reproach.</q> Newman Smyth, Christian Ethics,
45, 67-70, 79&mdash;<q>True conservatism is progress which takes direction from the past and
fulfils its good; false conservatism is a narrowing and hopeless reversion to the past,
which is a betrayal of the promise of the future. So Jesus came not <emph><q>to destroy the law or
the prophets</q></emph>; he <emph><q>came not to destroy, but to fulfil</q> (Mat. 5:17)</emph>.... The last book on Christian
Ethics will not be written before the Judgment Day.</q> John Milton, Areopagitica:
<q>Truth is compared in the Scripture to a streaming fountain; if her waters flow not
in a perpetual progression, they sicken into a muddy pool of conformity and tradition.
A man may be a heretic in the truth.</q> Paul in <emph>Rom. 2:16</emph>, and in <emph>2 Tim. 2:8</emph>&mdash;speaks
of <emph><q>my gospel.</q></emph> It is the duty of every Christian to have his own conception of
the truth, while he respects the conceptions of others. Tennyson, Locksley Hall: <q>I
that rather held it better men should perish one by one, Than that earth should stand
at gaze like Joshua's moon at Ajalon.</q> We do not expect any new worlds, and we
need not expect any new Scriptures; but we may expect progress in the interpretation
of both. Facts are final, but interpretation is not.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Method Of Theology.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Requisites to the study of Theology.</head>

<p>
The requisites to the successful study
of theology have already in part been indicated in speaking of its limitations.
In spite of some repetition, however, we mention the following:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>A disciplined mind.</hi> Only such a mind can patiently collect the
facts, hold in its grasp many facts at once, educe by continuous reflection
their connecting principles, suspend final judgment until its conclusions
are verified by Scripture and experience.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Robert Browning, Ring and Book, 175 (Pope, 228)&mdash;<q>Truth nowhere lies, yet everywhere,
in these; Not absolutely in a portion, yet Evolveable from the whole: evolved
at last Painfully, held tenaciously by me.</q> Teachers and students may be divided
into two classes: (1) those who know enough already; (2) those wish to learn more
than they now know. Motto of Winchester School in England: <q>Disce, aut discede.</q>
Butcher, Greek Genius, 213, 230&mdash;<q>The Sophists fancied that they were imparting education,
when they were only imparting results. Aristotle illustrates their method by
the example of a shoemaker who, professing to teach the art of making painless shoes,
puts into the apprentice's hand a large assortment of shoes ready-made. A witty
Frenchman classes together those who would make science popular, metaphysics
intelligible, and vice respectable. The word σχόλη, which first meant <q>leisure,</q>
then <q>philosophical discussion,</q> and finally <q>school,</q> shows the pure love of learning
among the Greeks.</q> Robert G. Ingersoll said that the average provincial clergyman
is like the land of the upper Potomac spoken of by Tom Randolph, as almost worthless
in its original state, and rendered wholly so by cultivation. Lotze, Metaphysics, 1:16&mdash;<q>the
constant whetting of the knife is tedious, if it is not proposed to cut anything
with it.</q> <q>To do their duty is their only holiday,</q> is the description of Athenian
character given by Thucydides. Chitty asked a father inquiring as to his son's qualifications
for the law: <q>Can your son eat sawdust without any butter?</q> On opportunities
for culture in the Christian ministry, see New Englander, Oct. 1875:644; A. H.
Strong, Philosophy and Religion, 273-275; Christ in Creation, 318-320.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>An intuitional as distinguished from a merely logical habit of
mind</hi>,&mdash;or, trust in the mind's primitive convictions, as well as in its
processes of reasoning. The theologian must have insight as well as understanding.
He must accustom himself to ponder spiritual facts as well as
those which are sensible and material; to see things in their inner relations
as well as in their outward forms; to cherish confidence in the reality and
the unity of truth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Vinet, Outlines of Philosophy, 39, 40&mdash;<q>If I do not feel that good is good, who will
ever prove it to me?</q> Pascal: <q>Logic, which is an abstraction, may shake everything.
A being purely intellectual will be incurably sceptical.</q> Calvin: <q>Satan is an acute
theologian.</q> Some men can see a fly on a barn door a mile away, and yet can never
see the door. Zeller, Outlines of Greek Philosophy, 93&mdash;<q>Gorgias the Sophist was
able to show metaphysically that nothing can exist; that what does exist cannot be
known by us; and that what is known by us cannot be imparted to others</q> (quoted
by Wenley, Socrates and Christ, 28). Aristotle differed from those moderate men who
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
thought it impossible to go over the same river twice,&mdash;he held that it could not be
done even once (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Wordsworth, Prelude, 536). Dove, Logic of the Christian Faith,
1-29, and especially 25, gives a demonstration of the impossibility of motion: A thing
cannot move in the place where it is; it cannot move in the places where it is not;
but the place where it is and the places where it is not are all the places that there
are; therefore a thing cannot move at all. Hazard, Man a Creative First Cause, 109,
shows that the bottom of a wheel does not move, since it goes backward as fast as the
top goes forward. An instantaneous photograph makes the upper part a confused
blur, while the spokes of the lower part are distinctly visible. Abp. Whately: <q>Weak
arguments are often thrust before my path; but, although they are most unsubstantial,
it is not easy to destroy them. There is not a more difficult feat known than to
cut through a cushion with a sword.</q> <emph><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> 1 Tim. 6:20&mdash;<q>oppositions of the knowledge which is
falsely so called</q></emph>; <emph>3:2&mdash;<q>the bishop therefore must be ... sober-minded</q></emph>&mdash;σώφρων = <q>well balanced.</q>
The Scripture speaks of <emph><q>sound [ὑγιής = healthful] doctrine</q> (1 Tim. 1:10)</emph>. Contrast
<emph>1 Tim. 6:4&mdash;[νοσῶν = ailing] <q>diseased about questionings and disputes of words.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>An acquaintance with physical, mental, and moral science.</hi>
The method of conceiving and expressing Scripture truth is so affected by
our elementary notions of these sciences, and the weapons with which
theology is attacked and defended are so commonly drawn from them as
arsenals, that the student cannot afford to be ignorant of them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Goethe explains his own greatness by his avoidance of metaphysics: <q>Mein Kind,
Ich habe es klug gemacht: Ich habe nie über's Denken gedacht</q>&mdash;<q>I have been
wise in never thinking about thinking</q>; he would have been wiser, had he pondered
more deeply the fundamental principles of his philosophy; see A. H. Strong, The
Great Poets and their Theology, 296-299, and Philosophy and Religion, 1-18; also in Baptist
Quarterly, 2:393 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Many a theological system has fallen, like the Campanile at
Venice, because its foundations were insecure. Sir William Hamilton: <q>No difficulty
arises in theology which has not first emerged in philosophy.</q> N. W. Taylor:
<q>Give me a young man in metaphysics, and I care not who has him in theology.</q>
President Samson Talbot: <q>I love metaphysics, because they have to do with realities.</q>
The maxim <q>Ubi tres medici, ibi duo athei,</q> witnesses to the truth of Galen's
words: ἄριστος ἰατρὸς καὶ φιλόσοφος&mdash;<q>the best physician is also a philosopher.</q> Theology
cannot dispense with science, any more than science can dispense with philosophy.
E. G. Robinson: <q>Science has not invalidated any fundamental truth of revelation,
though it has modified the statement of many.... Physical Science will undoubtedly
knock some of our crockery gods on the head, and the sooner the better.</q> There is
great advantage to the preacher in taking up, as did Frederick W. Robertson, one
science after another. Chemistry entered into his mental structure, as he said, <q>like
iron into the blood.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>A knowledge of the original languages of the Bible.</hi> This is
necessary to enable us not only to determine the meaning of the fundamental
terms of Scripture, such as holiness, sin, propitiation, justification,
but also to interpret statements of doctrine by their connections with the
context.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Emerson said that the man who reads a book in a strange tongue, when he can have
a good translation, is a fool. Dr. Behrends replied that he is a fool who is satisfied with
the substitute. E. G. Robinson: <q>Language is a great organism, and no study so disciplines
the mind as the dissection of an organism.</q> Chrysostom: <q>This is the cause
of all our evils&mdash;our not knowing the Scriptures.</q> Yet a modern scholar has said:
<q>The Bible is the most dangerous of all God's gifts to men.</q> It is possible to adore the
letter, while we fail to perceive its spirit. A narrow interpretation may contradict its
meaning. Much depends upon connecting phrases, as for example, the διὰ τοῦτο and ἐφ᾽ ᾧ,
in <emph>Rom. 5:12</emph>. Professor Philip Lindsley of Princeton, 1813-1853, said to his pupils:
<q>One of the best preparations for death is a thorough knowledge of the Greek grammar.</q>
The youthful Erasmus: <q>When I get some money, I will get me some Greek
books, and, after that, some clothes.</q> The dead languages are the only really living
ones&mdash;free from danger of misunderstanding from changing usage. Divine Providence
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
has put revelation into fixed forms in the Hebrew and the Greek. Sir William
Hamilton, Discussions, 330&mdash;<q>To be a competent divine is in fact to be a scholar.</q>
On the true idea of a Theological Seminary Course, see A. H. Strong, Philos. and Religion,
302-313.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>A holy affection toward God.</hi> Only the renewed heart can properly
feel its need of divine revelation, or understand that revelation when
given.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Ps. 25:14&mdash;<q>The secret of Jehovah is with them that fear him</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 12:2&mdash;<q>prove what is the ...
will of God</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Ps. 36:1&mdash;<q>the transgression of the wicked speaks in his heart like an oracle.</q></emph> <q>It is the
heart and not the brain That to the highest doth attain.</q> To <q>learn by heart</q> is something
more than to learn by mind, or by head. All heterodoxy is preceded by heteropraxy.
In Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, Faithful does not go through the Slough of
Despond, as Christian did; and it is by getting over the fence to find an easier road, that
Christian and Hopeful get into Doubting Castle and the hands of Giant Despair.
<q>Great thoughts come from the heart,</q> said Vauvenargues. The preacher cannot,
like Dr. Kane, kindle fire with a lens of ice. Aristotle: <q>The power of attaining
moral truth is dependent upon our acting rightly.</q> Pascal: <q>We know truth, not
only by the reason, but by the heart.... The heart has its reasons, which the reason
knows nothing of.</q> Hobbes: <q>Even the axioms of geometry would be disputed, if
men's passions were concerned in them.</q> Macaulay: <q>The law of gravitation would
still be controverted, if it interfered with vested interests.</q> Nordau, Degeneracy:
<q>Philosophic systems simply furnish the excuses reason demands for the unconscious
impulses of the race during a given period of time.</q>
</p>

<p>
Lord Bacon: <q>A tortoise on the right path will beat a racer on the wrong path.</q>
Goethe: <q>As are the inclinations, so also are the opinions.... A work of art can be
comprehended by the head only with the assistance of the heart.... Only law can
give us liberty.</q> Fichte: <q>Our system of thought is very often only the history of
our heart.... Truth is descended from conscience.... Men do not will according to
their reason, but they reason according to their will.</q> Neander's motto was: <q>Pectus
est quod theologum facit</q>&mdash;<q>It is the heart that makes the theologian.</q> John
Stirling: <q>That is a dreadful eye which can be divided from a living human heavenly
heart, and still retain its all-penetrating vision,&mdash;such was the eye of the Gorgons.</q>
But such an eye, we add, is not all-penetrating. E. G. Robinson: <q>Never study theology
in cold blood.</q> W. C. Wilkinson: <q>The head is a magnetic needle with truth for
its pole. But the heart is a hidden mass of magnetic iron. The head is drawn somewhat
toward its natural pole, the truth; but more it is drawn by that nearer magnetism.</q>
See an affecting instance of Thomas Carlyle's enlightenment, after the death of his
wife, as to the meaning of the Lord's Prayer, in Fisher, Nat. and Meth. of Revelation,
165. On the importance of feeling, in association of ideas, see Dewey, Psychology,
106, 107.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>The enlightening influence of the Holy Spirit.</hi> As only the
Spirit fathoms the things of God, so only he can illuminate our minds to
apprehend them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>1 Cor. 2:11, 12&mdash;<q>the things of God none knoweth, save the Spirit of God. But we received ... the Spirit
which is from God; that we might know.</q></emph> Cicero, Nat. Deorum, 66&mdash;<q>Nemo igitur vir magnus
sine aliquo adfiatu divino unquam fuit.</q> Professor Beck of Tübingen: <q>For the student,
there is no privileged path leading to the truth; the only one which leads to it
is also that of the unlearned; it is that of regeneration and of gradual illumination by
the Holy Spirit; and without the Holy Spirit, theology is not only a cold stone, it is a
deadly poison.</q> As all the truths of the differential and integral calculus are wrapped
up in the simplest mathematical axiom, so all theology is wrapped up in the declaration
that God is holiness and love, or in the protevangelium uttered at the gates of Eden.
But dull minds cannot of themselves evolve the calculus from the axiom, nor can sinful
hearts evolve theology from the first prophecy. Teachers are needed to demonstrate
geometrical theorems, and the Holy Spirit is needed to show us that the <emph><q>new
commandment</q></emph> illustrated by the death of Christ is only an <emph><q>old commandment which ye had from the
beginning</q> (1 John 2:7)</emph>. The Principia of Newton is a revelation of Christ, and so are the
Scriptures. The Holy Spirit enables us to enter into the meaning of Christ's revelations
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
in both Scripture and nature; to interpret the one by the other; and so to work out
original demonstrations and applications of the truth; <emph>Mat. 13:52&mdash;<q>Therefore every scribe who
hath been made a disciple of the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is a householder, who bringeth forth out of
his treasure things new and old.</q></emph> See Adolph Monod's sermons on Christ's Temptation, addressed
to the theological students of Montauban, in Select Sermons from the French
and German, 117-179.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Divisions of Theology.</head>

<p>
Theology is commonly divided into Biblical,
Historical, Systematic, and Practical.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Biblical Theology</hi> aims to arrange and classify the facts of revelation,
confining itself to the Scriptures for its material, and treating of doctrine
only so far as it was developed at the close of the apostolic age.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Instance DeWette, Biblische Theologie; Hofmann, Schriftbeweis; Nitzsch, System
of Christian Doctrine. The last, however, has more of the philosophical element than
properly belongs to Biblical Theology. The third volume of Ritschl's Justification and
Reconciliation is intended as a system of Biblical Theology, the first and second
volumes being little more than an historical introduction. But metaphysics, of a
Kantian relativity and phenomenalism, enter so largely into Ritschl's estimates and
interpretations, as to render his conclusions both partial and rationalistic. Notice a
questionable use of the term Biblical Theology to designate the theology of a part of
Scripture severed from the rest, as Steudel's Biblical Theology of the Old Testament;
Schmidt's Biblical Theology of the New Testament; and in the common phrases:
Biblical Theology of Christ, or of Paul. These phrases are objectionable as intimating
that the books of Scripture have only a human origin. Upon the assumption that
there is no common divine authorship of Scripture, Biblical Theology is conceived of
as a series of fragments, corresponding to the differing teachings of the various
prophets and apostles, and the theology of Paul is held to be an unwarranted and
incongruous addition to the theology of Jesus. See Reuss, History of Christian
Theology in the Apostolic Age.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Historical Theology</hi> traces the development of the Biblical doctrines
from the time of the apostles to the present day, and gives account of the
results of this development in the life of the church.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
By doctrinal development we mean the progressive unfolding and apprehension, by
the church, of the truth explicitly or implicitly contained in Scripture. As giving
account of the shaping of the Christian faith into doctrinal statements, Historical
Theology is called the History of Doctrine. As describing the resulting and accompanying
changes in the life of the church, outward and inward, Historical Theology
is called Church History. Instance Cunningham's Historical Theology; Hagenbach's
and Shedd's Histories of Doctrine; Neander's Church History. There is always a danger
that the historian will see his own views too clearly reflected in the history of the church.
Shedd's History of Christian Doctrine has been called <q>The History of Dr. Shedd's
Christian Doctrine.</q> But if Dr. Shedd's Augustinianism colors his History, Dr.
Sheldon's Arminianism also colors his. G. P. Fisher's History of Christian Doctrine is
unusually lucid and impartial. See Neander's Introduction and Shedd's Philosophy of
History.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Systematic Theology</hi> takes the material furnished by Biblical and
by Historical Theology, and with this material seeks to build up into an
organic and consistent whole all our knowledge of God and of the relations
between God and the universe, whether this knowledge be originally
derived from nature or from the Scriptures.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Systematic Theology is therefore theology proper, of which Biblical and Historical
Theology are the incomplete and preparatory stages. Systematic Theology is to be
clearly distinguished from Dogmatic Theology. Dogmatic Theology is, in strict usage,
the systematizing of the doctrines as expressed in the symbols of the church, together
with the grounding of these in the Scriptures, and the exhibition, so far as may be, of
their rational necessity. Systematic Theology begins, on the other hand, not with the
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
symbols, but with the Scriptures. It asks first, not what the church has believed, but
what is the truth of God's revealed word. It examines that word with all the aids
which nature and the Spirit have given it, using Biblical and Historical Theology as its
servants and helpers, but not as its masters. Notice here the technical use of the word
<q>symbol,</q> from συμβάλλω, = a brief throwing together, or condensed statement of the
essentials of Christian doctrine. Synonyms are: Confession, creed, consensus, declaration,
formulary, canons, articles of faith.
</p>

<p>
Dogmatism argues to foregone conclusions. The word is not, however, derived
from <q>dog,</q> as Douglas Jerrold facetiously suggested, when he said that <q>dogmatism
is puppyism full grown,</q> but from δοκέω to think, to opine. Dogmatic Theology has
two principles: (1) The absolute authority of creeds, as decisions of the church: (2)
The application to these creeds of formal logic, for the purpose of demonstrating
their truth to the understanding. In the Roman Catholic Church, not the Scripture
but the church, and the dogma given by it, is the decisive authority. The Protestant
principle, on the contrary, is that Scripture decides, and that dogma is to be judged by
it. Following Schleiermacher, Al. Schweizer thinks that the term <q>Dogmatik</q>
should be discarded as essentially unprotestant, and that <q>Glaubenslehre</q> should
take its place; and Harnack, Hist. Dogma, 6, remarks that <q>dogma has ever, in the
progress of history, devoured its own progenitors.</q> While it is true that every new
and advanced thinker in theology has been counted a heretic, there has always been
a common faith&mdash;<emph><q>the faith which was once for all delivered unto the saints</q> (Jude 3)</emph>&mdash;and the study
of Systematic Theology has been one of the chief means of preserving this faith in the
world. <emph>Mat. 15:13, 14&mdash;<q>Every plant which my heavenly Father planted not, shall be rooted up. Let them
alone: they are blind guides</q></emph> = there is truth planted by God, and it has permanent divine
life. Human errors have no permanent vitality and they perish of themselves. See
Kaftan, Dogmatik, 2, 3.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>Practical Theology</hi> is the system of truth considered as a means of
renewing and sanctifying men, or, in other words, theology in its publication
and enforcement.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
To this department of theology belong Homiletics and Pastoral Theology, since
these are but scientific presentations of the right methods of unfolding Christian
truth, and of bringing it to bear upon men individually and in the church. See Van
Oosterzee, Practical Theology; T. Harwood Pattison, The Making of the Sermon, and
Public Prayer; Yale Lectures on Preaching by H. W. Beecher, R. W. Dale, Phillips
Brooks, E. G. Robinson, A. J. F. Behrends, John Watson, and others; and the work on
Pastoral Theology, by Harvey.
</p>

<p>
It is sometimes asserted that there are other departments of theology not included in
those above mentioned. But most of these, if not all, belong to other spheres of
research, and cannot properly be classed under theology at all. Moral Theology, so
called, or the science of Christian morals, ethics, or theological ethics, is indeed the
proper result of theology, but is not to be confounded with it. Speculative theology,
so called, respecting, as it does, such truth as is mere matter of opinion, is either
extra-scriptural, and so belongs to the province of the philosophy of religion, or is an
attempt to explain truth already revealed, and so falls within the province of Systematic
Theology. <q>Speculative theology starts from certain <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> principles, and
from them undertakes to determine what is and must be. It deduces its scheme
of doctrine from the laws of mind or from axioms supposed to be inwrought into its
constitution.</q> Bib. Sac., 1852:376&mdash;<q>Speculative theology tries to show that the
dogmas agree with the laws of thought, while the philosophy of religion tries to
show that the laws of thought agree with the dogmas.</q> Theological Encyclopædia
(the word signifies <q>instruction in a circle</q>) is a general introduction to all the divisions
of Theology, together with an account of the relations between them. Hegel's
Encyclopædia was an attempted exhibition of the principles and connections of all
the sciences. See Crooks and Hurst, Theological Encyclopædia and Methodology;
Zöckler, Handb. der theol. Wissenschaften, 2:606-769.
</p>

<p>
The relations of theology to science and philosophy have been variously stated, but
by none better than by H. B. Smith, Faith and Philosophy, 18&mdash;<q>Philosophy is a mode
of human knowledge&mdash;not the whole of that knowledge, but a mode of it&mdash;the
knowing of things rationally.</q> Science asks: <q>What <emph>do</emph> I know?</q> Philosophy asks:
<q>What <emph>can</emph> I know?</q> William James, Psychology, 1:145&mdash;<q>Metaphysics means nothing
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
but an unusually obstinate effort to think clearly.</q> Aristotle: <q>The particular
sciences are toiling workmen, while philosophy is the architect. The workmen are
slaves, existing for the free master. So philosophy rules the sciences.</q> With regard to
philosophy and science Lord Bacon remarks: <q>Those who have handled knowledge
have been too much either men of mere observation or abstract reasoners. The
former are like the ant: they only collect material and put it to immediate use. The
abstract reasoners are like spiders, who make cobwebs out of their own substance.
But the bee takes a middle course: it gathers its material from the flowers of the
garden and the field, while it transforms and digests what it gathers by a power of its
own. Not unlike this is the work of the philosopher.</q> Novalis: <q>Philosophy can
bake no bread; but it can give us God, freedom and immortality.</q> Prof. DeWitt of
Princeton: <q>Science, philosophy, and theology are the three great modes of organizing
the universe into an intellectual system. Science never goes below second
causes; if it does, it is no longer science,&mdash;it becomes philosophy. Philosophy views
the universe as a unity, and the goal it is always seeking to reach is the source and
centre of this unity&mdash;the Absolute, the First Cause. This goal of philosophy is the
point of departure for theology. What philosophy is striving to find, theology
asserts has been found. Theology therefore starts with the Absolute, the First
Cause.</q> W. N. Clarke, Christian Theology, 48&mdash;<q>Science examines and classifies
facts; philosophy inquires concerning spiritual meanings. Science seeks to know the
universe; philosophy to understand it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Balfour, Foundations of Belief, 7&mdash;<q>Natural science has for its subject matter
things and events. Philosophy is the systematic exhibition of the grounds of our
knowledge. Metaphysics is our knowledge respecting realities which are not phenomenal,
<hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, God and the soul.</q> Knight, Essays in Philosophy, 81&mdash;<q>The aim of the
sciences is increase of knowledge, by the discovery of laws within which all phenomena
may be embraced and by means of which they may be explained. The aim of
philosophy, on the other hand, is to explain the sciences, by at once including and
transcending them. Its sphere is substance and essence.</q> Bowne, Theory of Thought
and Knowledge, 3-5&mdash;<q>Philosophy = <emph>doctrine of knowledge</emph> (is mind passive or active
in knowing?&mdash;Epistemology) + <emph>doctrine of being</emph> (is fundamental being mechanical
and unintelligent, or purposive and intelligent?&mdash;Metaphysics). The systems of
Locke, Hume, and Kant are preëminently theories of knowing; the systems of
Spinoza and Leibnitz are preëminently theories of being. Historically theories of
being come first, because the object is the only determinant for reflective thought.
But the instrument of philosophy is thought itself. First then, we must study Logic,
or the theory of thought; secondly, Epistemology, or the theory of knowledge;
thirdly, Metaphysics, or the theory of being.</q>
</p>

<p>
Professor George M. Forbes on the New Psychology: <q>Locke and Kant represent
the two tendencies in philosophy&mdash;the empirical, physical, scientific, on the one hand,
and the rational, metaphysical, logical, on the other. Locke furnishes the basis for
the associational schemes of Hartley, the Mills, and Bain; Kant for the idealistic
scheme of Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel. The two are not contradictory, but complementary,
and the Scotch Reid and Hamilton combine them both, reacting against the
extreme empiricism and scepticism of Hume. Hickok, Porter, and McCosh represented
the Scotch school in America. It was exclusively <emph>analytical</emph>; its psychology
was the faculty-psychology; it represented the mind as a bundle of faculties. The
unitary philosophy of T. H. Green, Edward Caird, in Great Britain, and in America,
of W. T. Harris, George S. Morris, and John Dewey, was a reaction against this faculty-psychology,
under the influence of Hegel. A second reaction under the influence of
the Herbartian doctrine of apperception substituted function for faculty, making all
processes phases of apperception. G. F. Stout and J. Mark Baldwin represent this
psychology. A third reaction comes from the influence of physical science. All
attempts to unify are relegated to a metaphysical Hades. There is nothing but states
and processes. The only unity is the laws of their coëxistence and succession. There
is nothing <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign>. Wundt identifies apperception with will, and regards it as the
unitary principle. Külpe and Titchener find no self, or will, or soul, but treat these as
inferences little warranted. Their psychology is psychology without a soul. The old
psychology was exclusively <emph>static</emph>, while the new emphasizes the genetic point of view.
Growth and development are the leading ideas of Herbert Spencer, Preyer, Tracy
and Stanley Hall. William James is explanatory, while George T. Ladd is descriptive.
Cattell, Scripture, and Münsterberg apply the methods of Fechner, and the Psychological
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
Review is their organ. Their error is in their negative attitude. The old psychology
is needed to supplement the new. It has greater scope and more practical
significance.</q> On the relation of theology to philosophy and to science, see Luthardt,
Compend. der Dogmatik, 4; Hagenbach, Encyclopädie, 109.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. History of Systematic Theology.</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>In the Eastern Church</hi>, Systematic Theology may be said to have
had its beginning and end in John of Damascus (700-760).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Ignatius († 115&mdash;Ad Trall., c. 9) gives us <q>the first distinct statement of the faith
drawn up in a series of propositions. This systematizing formed the basis of all later
efforts</q> (Prof. A. H. Newman). Origen of Alexandria (186-254) wrote his Περὶ Ἀρχῶν;
Athanasius of Alexandria (300-373) his Treatises on the Trinity and the Deity of Christ;
and Gregory of Nyssa in Cappadocia (332-398) his Λόγος κατηχητικὸς ὁ μέγας. Hatch,
Hibbert Lectures, 323, regards the <q>De Principiis</q> of Origen as the <q>first complete system
of dogma,</q> and speaks of Origen as <q>the disciple of Clement of Alexandria, the
first great teacher of philosophical Christianity.</q> But while the Fathers just mentioned
seem to have conceived the plan of expounding the doctrines in order and of
showing their relation to one another, it was John of Damascus (700-760) who first
actually carried out such a plan. His Ἔκδοσις ἀκριβὴς τῆς ὀρθοδόξου Πίστεως, or Summary
of the Orthodox Faith, may be considered the earliest work of Systematic Theology.
Neander calls it <q>the most important doctrinal text-book of the Greek Church.</q> John,
like the Greek Church in general, was speculative, theological, semi-pelagian, sacramentarian.
The Apostles' Creed, so called, is, in its present form, not earlier than the
fifth century; see Schaff, Creeds of Christendom, 1:19. Mr. Gladstone suggested that
the Apostles' Creed was a development of the baptismal formula. McGiffert, Apostles'
Creed, assigns to the meagre original form a date of the third quarter of the second
century, and regards the Roman origin of the symbol as proved. It was framed
as a baptismal formula, but specifically in opposition to the teachings of Marcion,
which were at that time causing much trouble at Rome. Harnack however dates the
original Apostles' Creed at 150, and Zahn places it at 120. See also J. C. Long, in Bap.
Quar. Rev., Jan. 1892: 89-101.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>In the Western Church</hi>, we may (with Hagenbach) distinguish
three periods:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The period of Scholasticism,&mdash;introduced by Peter Lombard
(1100-1160), and reaching its culmination in Thomas Aquinas (1221-1274)
and Duns Scotus (1265-1308).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Though Systematic Theology had its beginning in the Eastern Church, its development
has been confined almost wholly to the Western. Augustine (353-430) wrote
his <q>Encheiridion ad Laurentium</q> and his <q>De Civitate Dei,</q> and John Scotus Erigena
(† 850), Roscelin (1092-1122), and Abelard (1079-1142), in their attempts at the
rational explanation of the Christian doctrine foreshadowed the works of the great
scholastic teachers. Anselm of Canterbury (1034-1109), with his <q>Proslogion de Dei
Existentia</q> and his <q>Cur Deus Homo,</q> has sometimes, but wrongly, been called the
founder of Scholasticism. Allen, in his Continuity of Christian Thought, represents
the transcendence of God as the controlling principle of the Augustinian and of the
Western theology. The Eastern Church, he maintains, had founded its theology on
God's immanence. Paine, in his Evolution of Trinitarianism, shows that this is erroneous.
Augustine was a theistic monist. He declares that <q>Dei voluntas rerum natura
est,</q> and regards God's upholding as a continuous creation. Western theology recognized
the immanence of God as well as his transcendence.
</p>

<p>
Peter Lombard, however, (1100-1160), the <q>magister sententiarum,</q> was the first
great systematizer of the Western Church, and his <q>Libri Sententiarum Quatuor</q> was
the theological text-book of the Middle Ages. Teachers lectured on the <q>Sentences</q>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sententia</foreign> = sentence, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Satz</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>locus</foreign>, point, article of faith), as they did on the books of
Aristotle, who furnished to Scholasticism its impulse and guide. Every doctrine was
treated in the order of Aristotle's four causes: the material, the formal, the efficient,
the final. (<q>Cause</q> here = requisite: (1) matter of which a thing consists, <hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, bricks
and mortar; (2) form it assumes, <hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, plan or design; (3) producing agent, <hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>,
builder; (4) end for which made, <hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, house.) The organization of physical as well as
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
of theological science was due to Aristotle. Dante called him <q>the master of those who
know.</q> James Ten Broeke, Bap. Quar. Rev., Jan. 1892:1-26&mdash;<q>The Revival of Learning
showed the world that the real Aristotle was much broader than the Scholastic
Aristotle&mdash;information very unwelcome to the Roman Church.</q> For the influence
of Scholasticism, compare the literary methods of Augustine and of Calvin,&mdash;the
former giving us his materials in disorder, like soldiers bivouacked for the night; the
latter arranging them like those same soldiers drawn up in battle array; see A. H.
Strong, Philosophy and Religion, 4, and Christ in Creation, 188, 189.
</p>

<p>
Candlish, art.: Dogmatic, in Encycl. Brit., 7:340&mdash;<q>By and by a mighty intellectual
force took hold of the whole collected dogmatic material, and reared out of it the great
scholastic systems, which have been compared to the grand Gothic cathedrals that were
the work of the same ages.</q> Thomas Aquinas (1221-1274), the Dominican, <q>doctor
angelicus,</q> Augustinian and Realist,&mdash;and Duns Scotus (1265-1308), the Franciscan,
<q>doctor subtilis,</q>&mdash;wrought out the scholastic theology more fully, and left behind
them, in their <hi rend='italic'>Summæ</hi>, gigantic monuments of intellectual industry and acumen.
Scholasticism aimed at the proof and systematizing of the doctrines of the Church
by means of Aristotle's philosophy. It became at last an illimitable morass of useless
subtilities and abstractions, and it finally ended in the nominalistic scepticism of
William of Occam (1270-1347). See Townsend, The Great Schoolmen of the Middle Ages.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The period of Symbolism,&mdash;represented by the Lutheran theology
of Philip Melanchthon (1497-1560), and the Reformed theology of
John Calvin (1509-1564); the former connecting itself with the Analytic
theology of Calixtus (1585-1656), and the latter with the Federal theology
of Cocceius (1603-1669).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Lutheran Theology.</hi>&mdash;Preachers precede theologians, and Luther (1485-1546) was
preacher rather than theologian. But Melanchthon (1497-1560), <q>the preceptor of
Germany,</q> as he was called, embodied the theology of the Lutheran church in his <q>Loci
Communes</q> = points of doctrine common to believers (first edition Augustinian,
afterwards substantially Arminian; grew out of lectures on the Epistle to the Romans).
He was followed by Chemnitz (1522-1586), <q>clear and accurate,</q> the most learned of the
disciples of Melanchthon. Leonhard Hutter (1563-1616), called <q>Lutherus redivivus,</q>
and John Gerhard (1582-1637) followed Luther rather than Melanchthon. <q>Fifty years
after the death of Melanchthon, Leonhard Hutter, his successor in the chair of theology
at Wittenberg, on an occasion when the authority of Melanchthon was appealed to,
tore down from the wall the portrait of the great Reformer, and trampled it under foot
in the presence of the assemblage</q> (E. D. Morris, paper at the 60th Anniversary of Lane
Seminary). George Calixtus (1586-1656) followed Melanchthon rather than Luther.
He taught a theology which recognized the good element in both the Reformed and
the Romanist doctrine and which was called <q>Syncretism.</q> He separated Ethics from
Systematic Theology, and applied the analytical method of investigation to the latter,
beginning with the end, or final cause, of all things, viz.: blessedness. He was followed
in his analytic method by Dannhauer (1603-1666), who treated theology allegorically,
Calovius (1612-1686), <q>the most uncompromising defender of Lutheran orthodoxy
and the most drastic polemicist against Calixtus,</q> Quenstedt (1617-1688), whom
Hovey calls <q>learned, comprehensive and logical,</q> and Hollaz († 1730). The Lutheran
theology aimed to purify the <emph>existing</emph> church, maintaining that what is not against
the gospel is for it. It emphasized the material principle of the Reformation, justification
by faith; but it retained many Romanist customs not expressly forbidden in
Scripture. Kaftan, Am. Jour. Theol., 1900:716&mdash;<q>Because the mediæval school-philosophy
mainly held sway, the Protestant theology representing the new faith was
meanwhile necessarily accommodated to forms of knowledge thereby conditioned,
that is, to forms essentially Catholic.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Reformed Theology.</hi>&mdash;The word <q>Reformed</q> is here used in its technical sense,
as designating that phase of the new theology which originated in Switzerland. Zwingle,
the Swiss reformer (1484-1531), differing from Luther as to the Lord's Supper and as
to Scripture, was more than Luther entitled to the name of systematic theologian.
Certain writings of his may be considered the beginning of Reformed theology. But
it was left to John Calvin (1509-1564), after the death of Zwingle, to arrange the principles
of that theology in systematic form. Calvin dug channels for Zwingle's flood to
flow in, as Melanchthon did for Luther's. His Institutes (<q>Institutio Religionis Christianæ</q>),
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
is one of the great works in theology (superior as a systematic work to Melanchthon's
<q>Loci</q>). Calvin was followed by Peter Martyr (1500-1562), Chamier (1565-1621),
and Theodore Beza (1519-1605). Beza carried Calvin's doctrine of predestination
to an extreme supralapsarianism, which is hyper-Calvinistic rather than Calvinistic.
Cocceius (1603-1669), and after him Witsius (1626-1708), made theology centre about the
idea of the covenants, and founded the Federal theology. Leydecker (1642-1721)
treated theology in the order of the persons of the Trinity. Amyraldus (1596-1664)
and Placeus of Saumur (1596-1632) modified the Calvinistic doctrine, the latter by his
theory of mediate imputation, and the former by advocating the hypothetic universalism
of divine grace. Turretin (1671-1737), a clear and strong theologian whose work
is still a text-book at Princeton, and Pictet (1655-1725), both of them Federalists,
showed the influence of the Cartesian philosophy. The Reformed theology aimed to
build a <emph>new</emph> church, affirming that what is not derived from the Bible is against it. It
emphasized the formal principle of the Reformation, the sole authority of Scripture.
</p>

<p>
In general, while the line between Catholic and Protestant in Europe runs from west
to east, the line between Lutheran and Reformed runs from south to north, the
Reformed theology flowing with the current of the Rhine northward from Switzerland
to Holland and to England, in which latter country the Thirty-nine Articles represent
the Reformed faith, while the Prayer-book of the English Church is substantially
Arminian; see Dorner, Gesch. prot. Theologie, Einleit., 9. On the difference between
Lutheran and Reformed doctrine, see Schaff, Germany, its Universities, Theology and
Religion, 167-177. On the Reformed Churches of Europe and America, see H. B. Smith,
Faith and Philosophy, 87-124.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The period of Criticism and Speculation,&mdash;in its three divisions:
the Rationalistic, represented by Semler (1725-1791); the Transitional, by
Schleiermacher (1768-1834); the Evangelical, by Nitzsch, Müller, Tholuck
and Dorner.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>First Division.</hi> Rationalistic theologies: Though the Reformation had freed theology
in great part from the bonds of scholasticism, other philosophies after a time took its
place. The Leibnitz- (1646-1754) Wolffian (1679-1754) exaggeration of the powers of
natural religion prepared the way for rationalistic systems of theology. Buddeus
(1667-1729) combated the new principles, but Semler's (1725-1791) theology was built
upon them, and represented the Scriptures as having a merely local and temporary
character. Michaelis (1716-1784) and Doederlein (1714-1789) followed Semler, and the
tendency toward rationalism was greatly assisted by the critical philosophy of Kant
(1724-1804), to whom <q>revelation was problematical, and positive religion merely the
medium through which the practical truths of reason are communicated</q> (Hagenbach,
Hist. Doct., 2:397). Ammon (1766-1850) and Wegscheider (1771-1848) were representatives
of this philosophy. Daub, Marheinecke and Strauss (1808-1874) were the Hegelian
dogmatists. The system of Strauss resembled <q>Christian theology as a cemetery resembles
a town.</q> Storr (1746-1805), Reinhard (1753-1812), and Knapp (1753-1825), in the
main evangelical, endeavored to reconcile revelation with reason, but were more or
less influenced by this rationalizing spirit. Bretschneider (1776-1828) and De Wette
(1780-1849) may be said to have held middle ground.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Second Division.</hi> Transition to a more Scriptural theology. Herder (1744-1803) and
Jacobi (1743-1819), by their more spiritual philosophy, prepared the way for Schleiermacher's
(1768-1834) grounding of doctrine in the facts of Christian experience. The
writings of Schleiermacher constituted an epoch, and had great influence in delivering
Germany from the rationalistic toils into which it had fallen. We may now speak of a
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Third Division</hi>&mdash;and in this division we may put the names of Neander and Tholuck,
Twesten and Nitzsch, Müller and Luthardt, Dorner and Philippi, Ebrard and Thomasius,
Lange and Kahnis, all of them exponents of a far more pure and evangelical theology
than was common in Germany a century ago. Two new forms of rationalism,
however, have appeared in Germany, the one based upon the philosophy of Hegel, and
numbering among its adherents Strauss and Baur, Biedermann, Lipsius and Pfleiderer;
the other based upon the philosophy of Kant, and advocated by Ritschl and his
followers, Harnack, Hermann and Kaftan; the former emphasizing the ideal Christ,
the latter emphasizing the historical Christ; but neither of the two fully recognizing
the living Christ present in every believer (see Johnson's Cyclopædia, art.: Theology,
by A. H. Strong).
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Among theologians of views diverse from the prevailing Protestant
faith</hi>, may be mentioned:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Bellarmine (1542-1621), the Roman Catholic.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Besides Bellarmine, <q>the best controversial writer of his age</q> (Bayle), the Roman
Catholic Church numbers among its noted modern theologians:&mdash;Petavius (1583-1652),
whose dogmatic theology Gibbon calls <q>a work of incredible labor and compass</q>;
Melchior Canus (1523-1560), an opponent of the Jesuits and their scholastic method;
Bossuet (1627-1704), who idealized Catholicism in his Exposition of Doctrine, and
attacked Protestantism in his History of Variations of Protestant Churches; Jansen
(1585-1638), who attempted, in opposition to the Jesuits, to reproduce the theology of
Augustine, and who had in this the powerful assistance of Pascal (1623-1662). Jansenism,
so far as the doctrines of grace are concerned, but not as respects the sacraments,
is virtual Protestantism within the Roman Catholic Church. Moehler's Symbolism, Perrone's
<q>Prelectiones Theologicæ,</q> and Hurter's <q>Compendium Theologiæ Dogmaticæ</q>
are the latest and most approved expositions of Roman Catholic doctrine.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Arminius (1560-1609), the opponent of predestination.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Among the followers of Arminius (1560-1609) must be reckoned Episcopius (1583-1643),
who carried Arminianism to almost Pelagian extremes; Hugo Grotius (1553-1645),
the jurist and statesman, author of the governmental theory of the atonement;
and Limborch (1633-1712), the most thorough expositor of the Arminian doctrine.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Laelius Socinus (1525-1562), and Faustus Socinus (1539-1604),
the leaders of the modern Unitarian movement.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The works of Laelius Socinus (1525-1562) and his nephew, Faustus Socinus (1539-1604)
constituted the beginnings of modern Unitarianism. Laelius Socinus was the preacher
and reformer, as Faustus Socinus was the theologian; or, as Baumgarten Crusius
expresses it: <q>the former was the spiritual founder of Socinianism, and the latter the
founder of the sect.</q> Their writings are collected in the Bibliotheca Fratrum Polonorum.
The Racovian Catechism, taking its name from the Polish town Racow,
contains the most succinct exposition of their views. In 1660, the Unitarian church
of the Socini in Poland was destroyed by persecution, but its Hungarian offshoot
has still more than a hundred congregations.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>British Theology</hi>, represented by:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The Baptists, John Bunyan (1628-1688), John Gill (1697-1771),
and Andrew Fuller (1754-1815).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Some of the best British theology is Baptist. Among John Bunyan's works we may
mention his <q>Gospel Truths Opened,</q> though his <q>Pilgrim's Progress</q> and <q>Holy
War</q> are theological treatises in allegorical form. Macaulay calls Milton and
Bunyan the two great creative minds of England during the latter part of the 17th
century. John Gill's <q>Body of Practical Divinity</q> shows much ability, although the
Rabbinical learning of the author occasionally displays itself in a curious exegesis, as
when on the word <q>Abba</q> he remarks: <q>You see that this word which means 'Father'
reads the same whether we read forward or backward; which suggests that God is the
same whichever way we look at him.</q> Andrew Fuller's <q>Letters on Systematic
Divinity</q> is a brief compend of theology. His treatises upon special doctrines are
marked by sound judgment and clear insight. They were the most influential factor
in rescuing the evangelical churches of England from antinomianism. They justify
the epithets which Robert Hall, one of the greatest of Baptist preachers, gives him:
<q>sagacious,</q> <q>luminous,</q> <q>powerful.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The Puritans, John Owen (1616-1683), Richard Baxter (1615-1691),
John Howe (1630-1705), and Thomas Ridgeley (1666-1734).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Owen was the most rigid, as Baxter was the most liberal, of the Puritans. The
Encyclopædia Britannica remarks: <q>As a theological thinker and writer, John Owen
holds his own distinctly defined place among those titanic intellects with which the
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
age abounded. Surpassed by Baxter in point and pathos, by Howe in imagination
and the higher philosophy, he is unrivaled in his power of unfolding the rich meanings
of Scripture. In his writings he was preëminently the great theologian.</q> Baxter
wrote a <q>Methodus Theologiæ,</q> and a <q>Catholic Theology</q>; John Howe is chiefly
known by his <q>Living Temple</q>; Thomas Ridgeley by his <q>Body of Divinity.</q>
Charles H. Spurgeon never ceased to urge his students to become familiar with the
Puritan Adams, Ambrose, Bowden, Manton and Sibbes.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The Scotch Presbyterians, Thomas Boston (1676-1732), John Dick
(1764-1833), and Thomas Chalmers (1780-1847).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Of the Scotch Presbyterians, Boston is the most voluminous, Dick the most calm and
fair, Chalmers the most fervid and popular.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The Methodists, John Wesley (1703-1791), and Richard Watson
(1781-1833).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Of the Methodists, John Wesley's doctrine is presented in <q>Christian Theology,</q>
collected from his writings by the Rev. Thornley Smith. The great Methodist text-book,
however, is the <q>Institutes</q> of Watson, who systematized and expounded the
Wesleyan theology. Pope, a recent English theologian, follows Watson's modified
and improved Arminianism, while Whedon and Raymond, recent American writers,
hold rather to a radical and extreme Arminianism.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) The Quakers, George Fox (1624-1691), and Robert Barclay (1648-1690).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
As Jesus, the preacher and reformer, preceded Paul the theologian; as Luther
preceded Melanchthon; as Zwingle preceded Calvin; as Laelius Socinus preceded
Faustus Socinus; as Wesley preceded Watson; so Fox preceded Barclay. Barclay
wrote an <q>Apology for the true Christian Divinity,</q> which Dr. E. G. Robinson
described as <q>not a formal treatise of Systematic Theology, but the ablest exposition
of the views of the Quakers.</q> George Fox was the reformer, William Penn the social
founder, Robert Barclay the theologian, of Quakerism.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) The English Churchmen, Richard Hooker (1553-1600), Gilbert
Burnet (1643-1715), and John Pearson (1613-1686).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The English church has produced no great systematic theologian (see reasons
assigned in Dorner, Gesch. prot. Theologie, 470). The <q>judicious</q> Hooker is still its
greatest theological writer, although his work is only on <q>Ecclesiastical Polity.</q>
Bishop Burnet is the author of the <q>Exposition of the XXXIX Articles,</q> and Bishop
Pearson of the <q>Exposition of the Creed.</q> Both these are common English text-books.
A recent <q>Compendium of Dogmatic Theology,</q> by Litton, shows a tendency
to return from the usual Arminianism of the Anglican church to the old Augustinianism;
so also Bishop Moule's <q>Outlines of Christian Doctrine,</q> and Mason's <q>Faith of
the Gospel.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>American theology</hi>, running in two lines:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The Reformed system of Jonathan Edwards (1703-1758), modified
successively by Joseph Bellamy (1719-1790), Samuel Hopkins (1721-1803),
Timothy Dwight (1752-1817), Nathanael Emmons (1745-1840), Leonard
Woods (1774-1854), Charles G. Finney (1792-1875), Nathaniel W. Taylor
(1786-1858), and Horace Bushnell (1802-1876). Calvinism, as thus
modified, is often called the New England, or New School, theology.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Jonathan Edwards, one of the greatest of metaphysicians and theologians, was an
idealist who held that God is the only real cause, either in the realm of matter or in
the realm of mind. He regarded the chief good as happiness&mdash;a form of sensibility.
Virtue was voluntary choice of this good. Hence union with Adam in acts and
exercises was sufficient. Thus God's will made identity of being with Adam. This led
to the exercise-system of Hopkins and Emmons, on the one hand, and to Bellamy's and
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
Dwight's denial of any imputation of Adam's sin or of inborn depravity, on the other&mdash;in
which last denial agree many other New England theologians who reject the exercise-scheme,
as for example, Strong, Tyler, Smalley, Burton, Woods, and Park. Dr. N. W.
Taylor added a more distinctly Arminian element, the power of contrary choice&mdash;and
with this tenet of the New Haven theology, Charles G. Finney, of Oberlin, substantially
agreed. Horace Bushnell held to a practically Sabellian view of the Trinity, and to a
moral-influence theory of the atonement. Thus from certain principles admitted by
Edwards, who held in the main to an Old School theology, the New School theology
has been gradually developed.
</p>

<p>
Robert Hall called Edwards <q>the greatest of the sons of men.</q> Dr. Chalmers
regarded him as the <q>greatest of theologians.</q> Dr. Fairbairn says: <q>He is not only
the greatest of all the thinkers that America has produced, but also the highest speculative
genius of the eighteenth century. In a far higher degree than Spinoza, he was a
'God-intoxicated man.'</q> His fundamental notion that there is no causality except
the divine was made the basis of a theory of necessity which played into the hands of
the deists whom he opposed and was alien not only to Christianity but even to theism.
Edwards could not have gotten his idealism from Berkeley; it may have been suggested
to him by the writings of Locke or Newton, Cudworth or Descartes, John
Norris or Arthur Collier. See Prof. H. N. Gardiner, in Philos. Rev., Nov. 1900:573-596;
Prof. E. C. Smyth, in Am. Jour. Theol., Oct. 1897:956; Allen, Jonathan Edwards,
16, 308-310, and in Atlantic Monthly, Dec. 1891:767; Sanborn, in Jour. Spec.
Philos., Oct. 1883:401-420; G. P. Fisher, Edwards on the Trinity, 18, 19.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The older Calvinism, represented by Charles Hodge the father (1797-1878)
and A. A. Hodge the son (1823-1886), together with Henry B.
Smith (1815-1877), Robert J. Breckinridge (1800-1871), Samuel J. Baird,
and William G. T. Shedd (1820-1894). All these, although with minor
differences, hold to views of human depravity and divine grace more nearly
conformed to the doctrine of Augustine and Calvin, and are for this reason
distinguished from the New England theologians and their followers by
the popular title of Old School.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Old School theology, in its view of predestination, exalts God; New School theology,
by emphasizing the freedom of the will, exalts man. It is yet more important to notice
that Old School theology has for its characteristic tenet the guilt of inborn depravity.
But among those who hold this view, some are federalists and creationists, and justify
God's condemnation of all men upon the ground that Adam represented his posterity.
Such are the Princeton theologians generally, including Charles Hodge, A. A. Hodge,
and the brothers Alexander. Among those who hold to the Old School doctrine of the
guilt of inborn depravity, however, there are others who are traducians, and who
explain the imputation of Adam's sin to his posterity upon the ground of the natural
union between him and them. Baird's <q>Elohim Revealed</q> and Shedd's essay on
<q>Original Sin</q> (Sin a Nature and that Nature Guilt) represent this realistic conception
of the relation of the race to its first father. R. J. Breckinridge, R. L. Dabney, and
J. H. Thornwell assert the fact of inherent corruption and guilt, but refuse to assign
any <emph>rationale</emph> for it, though they tend to realism. H. B. Smith holds guardedly to the
theory of mediate imputation.
</p>

<p>
On the history of Systematic Theology in general, see Hagenbach, History of Doctrine
(from which many of the facts above given are taken), and Shedd, History of
Doctrine; also, Ebrard, Dogmatik, 1:44-100; Kahnis, Dogmatik, 1:15-128; Hase, Hutterus
Redivivus, 24-52. Gretillat, Théologie Systématique, 3:24-120, has given an
excellent history of theology, brought down to the present time. On the history of
New England theology, see Fisher, Discussions and Essays, 285-354.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Order of Treatment in Systematic Theology.</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Various methods of arranging the topics of a theological system.</hi>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The Analytical method of Calixtus begins with the assumed end of
all things, blessedness, and thence passes to the means by which it is
secured. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The Trinitarian method of Leydecker and Martensen regards
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
Christian doctrine as a manifestation successively of the Father, Son and
Holy Spirit. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The Federal method of Cocceius, Witsius, and Boston
treats theology under the two covenants. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The Anthropological method
of Chalmers and Rothe; the former beginning with the Disease of Man
and passing to the Remedy; the latter dividing his Dogmatik into the
Consciousness of Sin and the Consciousness of Redemption. (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) The
Christological method of Hase, Thomasius and Andrew Fuller treats of
God, man, and sin, as presuppositions of the person and work of Christ.
Mention may also be made of (<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) The Historical method, followed by
Ursinus, and adopted in Jonathan Edwards's History of Redemption; and
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) The Allegorical method of Dannhauer, in which man is described as a
wanderer, life as a road, the Holy Spirit as a light, the church as a candlestick,
God as the end, and heaven as the home; so Bunyan's Holy War,
and Howe's Living Temple.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See Calixtus, Epitome Theologiæ; Leydecker, De Œconomia trium Personarum in
Negotio Salutis humanæ; Martensen (1808-1884), Christian Dogmatics; Cocceius, Summa
Theologiæ, and Summa Doctrinæ de Fœdere et Testamento Dei, in Works, vol. vi;
Witsius, The Economy of the Covenants; Boston, A Complete Body of Divinity (in
Works, vol. 1 and 2), Questions in Divinity (vol. 6), Human Nature in its Fourfold
State (vol. 8); Chalmers, Institutes of Theology; Rothe (1799-1867), Dogmatik, and
Theologische Ethik; Hase (1800-1890), Evangelische Dogmatik; Thomasius (1802-1875),
Christi Person und Werk; Fuller, Gospel Worthy of all Acceptation (in Works,
2:328-416), and Letters on Systematic Divinity (1:684-711); Ursinus (1534-1583), Loci
Theologici (in Works, 1:426-909); Dannhauer (1603-1666) Hodosophia Christiana, seu
Theologia Positiva in Methodum redacta. Jonathan Edwards's so-called History of
Redemption was in reality a system of theology in historical form. It <q>was to begin
and end with eternity, all great events and epochs in time being viewed <q>sub specie
eternitatis.</q> The three worlds&mdash;heaven, earth and hell&mdash;were to be the scenes of this
grand drama. It was to include the topics of theology as living factors, each in its
own place,</q> and all forming a complete and harmonious whole; see Allen, Jonathan
Edwards, 379, 380.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>The Synthetic Method</hi>, which we adopt in this compendium, is both
the most common and the most logical method of arranging the topics
of theology. This method proceeds from causes to effects, or, in the
language of Hagenbach (Hist. Doctrine, 2:152), <q>starts from the highest
principle, God, and proceeds to man, Christ, redemption, and finally to
the end of all things.</q> In such a treatment of theology we may best
arrange our topics in the following order:
</p>

<lg>
<l>1st. The existence of God.</l>
<l>2d. The Scriptures a revelation from God.</l>
<l>3d. The nature, decrees and works of God.</l>
<l>4th. Man, in his original likeness to God and subsequent apostasy.</l>
<l>5th. Redemption, through the work of Christ and of the Holy Spirit.</l>
<l>6th. The nature and laws of the Christian church.</l>
<l>7th. The end of the present system of things.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>V. Text-Books in Theology.</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Confessions</hi>: Schaff, Creeds of Christendom.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Compendiums</hi>: H. B. Smith, System of Christian Theology; A. A.
Hodge, Outlines of Theology; E. H. Johnson, Outline of Systematic
Theology; Hovey, Manual of Theology and Ethics; W. N. Clarke, Outline
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
of Christian Theology; Hase, Hutterus Redivivus; Luthardt, Compendium
der Dogmatik; Kurtz, Religionslehre.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Extended Treatises</hi>: Dorner, System of Christian Doctrine; Shedd,
Dogmatic Theology; Calvin, Institutes; Charles Hodge, Systematic
Theology; Van Oosterzee, Christian Dogmatics; Baird, Elohim Revealed;
Luthardt, Fundamental, Saving, and Moral Truths; Phillippi, Glaubenslehre;
Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk.
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>Collected Works</hi>: Jonathan Edwards; Andrew Fuller.
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>Histories of Doctrine</hi>: Harnack; Hagenbach; Shedd; Fisher;
Sheldon; Orr, Progress of Dogma.
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='italic'>Monographs</hi>: Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin; Shedd, Discourses
and Essays; Liddon, Our Lord's Divinity; Dorner, History of the
Doctrine of the Person of Christ; Dale, Atonement; Strong, Christ
in Creation; Upton, Hibbert Lectures.
</p>

<p>
7. <hi rend='italic'>Theism</hi>: Martineau, Study of Religion; Harris, Philosophical
Basis of Theism; Strong, Philosophy and Religion; Bruce, Apologetics;
Drummond, Ascent of Man; Griffith-Jones, Ascent through Christ.
</p>

<p>
8. <hi rend='italic'>Christian Evidences</hi>: Butler, Analogy of Natural and Revealed
Religion; Fisher, Grounds of Theistic and Christian Belief; Row, Bampton
Lectures for 1877; Peabody, Evidences of Christianity; Mair, Christian
Evidences; Fairbairn, Philosophy of the Christian Religion; Matheson,
Spiritual Development of St. Paul.
</p>

<p>
9. <hi rend='italic'>Intellectual Philosophy</hi>: Stout, Handbook of Psychology; Bowne,
Metaphysics; Porter, Human Intellect; Hill, Elements of Psychology;
Dewey, Psychology.
</p>

<p>
10. <hi rend='italic'>Moral Philosophy</hi>: Robinson, Principles and Practice of Morality;
Smyth, Christian Ethics; Porter, Elements of Moral Science; Calderwood,
Moral Philosophy; Alexander, Moral Science; Robins, Ethics of the
Christian Life.
</p>

<p>
11. <hi rend='italic'>General Science</hi>: Todd, Astronomy; Wentworth and Hill, Physics;
Remsen, Chemistry; Brigham, Geology; Parker, Biology; Martin,
Physiology; Ward, Fairbanks, or West, Sociology; Walker, Political
Economy.
</p>

<p>
12. <hi rend='italic'>Theological Encyclopædias</hi>: Schaff-Herzog (English); McClintock
and Strong; Herzog (Second German Edition).
</p>

<p>
13. <hi rend='italic'>Bible Dictionaries</hi>: Hastings; Davis; Cheyne; Smith (edited by
Hackett).
</p>

<p>
14. <hi rend='italic'>Commentaries</hi>: Meyer, on the New Testament; Philippi, Lange,
Shedd, Sanday, on the Epistle to the Romans; Godet, on John's Gospel;
Lightfoot, on Philippians and Colossians; Expositor's Bible, on the Old
Testament books.
</p>

<p>
15. <hi rend='italic'>Bibles</hi>: American Revision (standard edition); Revised Greek-English
New Testament (published by Harper &amp; Brothers); Annotated
Paragraph Bible (published by the London Religious Tract Society)
Stier and Theile, Polyglotten-Bibel.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
An attempt has been made, in the list of text-books given above, to put first in each
class the book best worth purchasing by the average theological student, and to arrange
the books that follow this first one in the order of their value. German books, however,
when they are not yet accessible in an English translation, are put last, simply because
they are less likely to be used as books of reference by the average student.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part II. The Existence Of God.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Origin Of Our Idea Of God's Existence.</head>

<p>
God is the infinite and perfect Spirit in whom all things have their source,
support, and end.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
On the definition of the term God, see Hodge, Syst. Theol., 1:366. Other definitions
are those of Calovius: <q>Essentia spiritualis infinite</q>; Ebrard: <q>The eternal source
of all that is temporal</q>; Kahnis: <q>The infinite Spirit</q>; John Howe: <q>An eternal,
uncaused, independent, necessary Being, that hath active power, life, wisdom, goodness,
and whatsoever other supposable excellency, in the highest perfection, in and of
itself</q>; Westminster Catechism: <q>A Spirit infinite, eternal and unchangeable in his
being, wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness and truth</q>; Andrew Fuller: <q>The
first cause and last end of all things.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The existence of God is a first truth; in other words, the knowledge
of God's existence is a rational intuition. Logically, it precedes and conditions
all observation and reasoning. Chronologically, only reflection
upon the phenomena of nature and of mind occasions its rise in consciousness.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The term intuition means simply direct knowledge. Lowndes (Philos. of Primary
Beliefs, 78) and Mansel (Metaphysics, 52) would use the term only of our direct knowledge
of substances, as self and body; Porter applies it by preference to our cognition
of first truths, such as have been already mentioned. Harris (Philos. Basis of Theism,
44-151, but esp. 45, 46) makes it include both. He divides intuitions into two classes: 1.
<emph>Presentative</emph> intuitions, as self-consciousness (in virtue of which I perceive the existence
of spirit and already come in contact with the supernatural), and sense-perception
(in virtue of which I perceive the existence of matter, at least in my own organism,
and come in contact with nature); 2. <emph>Rational</emph> intuitions, as space, time, substance,
cause, final cause, right, absolute being. We may accept this nomenclature, using
the terms <q>first truths</q> and <q>rational intuitions</q> as equivalent to each other, and
classifying rational intuitions under the heads of (1) intuitions of relations, as space
and time; (2) intuitions of principles, as substance, cause, final cause, right; and (3)
intuition of absolute Being, Power, Reason, Perfection, Personality, as God. We hold
that, as upon occasion of the senses cognizing (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) extended matter, (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) succession,
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) qualities, (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) change, (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) order, (<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) action, respectively, the mind cognizes (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) space,
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) time, (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) substance, (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) cause, (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) design, (<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) obligation, so upon occasion of our
cognizing our finiteness, dependence and responsibility, the mind directly cognizes the
existence of an Infinite and Absolute Authority, Perfection, Personality, upon whom
we are dependent and to whom we are responsible.
</p>

<p>
Bowne, Theory of Thought and Knowledge, 60&mdash;<q>As we walk in entire ignorance
of our muscles, so we often think in entire ignorance of the principles which underlie
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
and determine thinking. But as anatomy reveals that the apparently simple act of
walking involves a highly complex muscular activity, so analysis reveals that the
apparently simple act of thinking involves a system of mental principles.</q> Dewey,
Psychology, 238, 244&mdash;<q>Perception, memory, imagination, conception&mdash;each of these
is an act of intuition.... Every concrete act of knowledge involves an intuition of
God.</q> Martineau, Types, 1:459&mdash;The attempt to divest experience of either percepts
or intuitions is <q>like the attempt to peel a bubble in search for its colors and contents:
in tenuem ex oculis evanuit auram</q>; Study, 1:199&mdash;<q>Try with all your might
to do something difficult, <hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, to shut a door against a furious wind, and you recognize
Self and Nature&mdash;causal will, over against external causality</q>; 201&mdash;<q>Hence
our fellow-feeling with Nature</q>; 65&mdash;<q>As Perception gives us Will in the shape of
Causality over against us in the non-ego, so Conscience gives us Will in the shape of
Authority over against us in the non-ego</q>; Types, 2:5&mdash;<q>In perception it is self and
nature, in morals it is self and God, that stand face to face in the subjective and
objective antithesis</q>; Study, 2:2, 3&mdash;<q>In volitional experience we meet with objective
<emph>causality</emph>; in moral experience we meet with objective <emph>authority</emph>,&mdash;both being
objects of immediate knowledge, on the same footing of certainty with the apprehension
of the external material world. I know of no logical advantage which the belief
in finite objects around us can boast over the belief in the infinite and righteous
Cause of all</q>; 51&mdash;<q>In recognition of God as Cause, we raise the University; in
recognition of God as Authority, we raise the Church.</q>
</p>

<p>
Kant declares that the idea of freedom is the source of our idea of personality,&mdash;personality
consists in the freedom of the whole soul from the mechanism of nature.
Lotze, Metaphysics, § 244&mdash;<q>So far as, and so long as, the soul knows itself as the identical
subject of inward experience, it is, and is named simply for that reason, substance.</q>
Illingworth, Personality, Human and Divine, 32&mdash;<q>Our conception of substance
is derived, not from the physical, but from the mental world. Substance is first
of all that which underlies our <emph>mental</emph> affections and manifestations.</q> James, Will to
Believe, 80&mdash;<q>Substance, as Kant says, means <q>das Beharrliche,</q> the abiding, that
which will be as it has been, because its being is essential and eternal.</q> In this sense we
have an intuitive belief in an abiding substance which underlies our own thoughts and
volitions, and this we call the soul. But we also have an intuitive belief in an abiding
substance which underlies all natural phenomena and all the events of history, and
this we call God. Among those who hold to this general view of an intuitive knowledge
of God may be mentioned the following:&mdash;Calvin, Institutes, book I, chap. 3;
Nitzsch, System of Christian Doctrine, 15-26, 133-140; Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 1:78-84;
Ulrici, Leib und Seele, 688-725; Porter, Human Intellect, 497; Hickok, Rational
Cosmology, 58-89; Farrar, Science in Theology, 27-29; Bib. Sac., July, 1872:533, and
January, 1873:204; Miller, Fetich in Theology, 110-122; Fisher, Essays, 565-572; Tulloch,
Theism, 314-336; Hodge, Systematic Theology, 1:191-203; Christlieb, Mod. Doubt and
Christian Belief, 75, 76; Raymond, Syst. Theology, 1:247-262; Bascom, Science of
Mind, 246, 247; Knight, Studies in Philos. and Lit., 155-224; A. H. Strong, Philosophy
and Religion, 76-89.
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. First Truths in General.</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Their nature.</hi>
</p>

<p>
A. Negatively.&mdash;A first truth is not (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Truth written prior to consciousness
upon the substance of the soul&mdash;for such passive knowledge implies a
materialistic view of the soul; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Actual knowledge of which the soul
finds itself in possession at birth&mdash;for it cannot be proved that the soul
has such knowledge; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) An idea, undeveloped at birth, but which has
the power of self-development apart from observation and experience&mdash;for
this is contrary to all we know of the laws of mental growth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Cicero, De Natura Deorum, 1:17&mdash;<q>Intelligi necesse est esse deos, quoniam insitas
eorum vel potius innatas cogitationes habemus.</q> Origen, Adv. Celsum, 1:4&mdash;<q>Men
would not be guilty, if they did not carry in their minds common notions of morality,
innate and written in divine letters.</q> Calvin, Institutes, 1:3:3&mdash;<q>Those who rightly
judge will always agree that there is an indelible sense of divinity engraven upon
men's minds.</q> Fleming, Vocab. of Philosophy, art.: <q>Innate Ideas</q>&mdash;<q>Descartes
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
is supposed to have taught (and Locke devoted the first book of his Essays to refuting
the doctrine) that these ideas are innate or connate with the soul; <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, the intellect
finds itself at birth, or as soon as it wakes to conscious activity, to be possessed of ideas
to which it has only to attach the appropriate names, or of judgments which it only
needs to express in fit propositions&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, prior to any experience of individual objects.</q>
</p>

<p>
Royce, Spirit of Modern Philosophy, 77&mdash;<q>In certain families, Descartes teaches, good
breeding and the gout are innate. Yet, of course, the children of such families have to
be instructed in deportment, and the infants just learning to walk seem happily quite
free from gout. Even so geometry is innate in us, but it does not come to our consciousness
without much trouble</q>; 79&mdash;Locke found no innate ideas. He maintained,
in reply, that <q>infants, with their rattles, showed no sign of being aware that things
which are equal to the same thing are equal to each other.</q> Schopenhauer said that
<q>Jacobi had the trifling weakness of taking all he had learned and approved before his
fifteenth year for inborn ideas of the human mind.</q> Bowne, Principles of Ethics, 5&mdash;<q>That
the rational ideas are conditioned by the sense experience and are sequent to it,
is unquestioned by any one; and that experience shows a successive order of manifestation
is equally undoubted. But the sensationalist has always shown a curious blindness
to the ambiguity of such a fact. He will have it that what comes after must be a
modification of what went before; whereas it might be <emph>that</emph>, <emph>and</emph> it might be a new,
though conditioned, manifestation of an immanent nature or law. Chemical affinity is
not gravity, although affinity cannot manifest itself until gravity has brought the elements
into certain relations.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pfleiderer, Philosophy of Religion, 1:103&mdash;<q>This principle was not from the beginning
in the consciousness of men; for, in order to think ideas, reason must be clearly
developed, which in the first of mankind it could just as little be as in children. This
however does not exclude the fact that there was from the beginning the unconscious
rational impulse which lay at the basis of the formation of the belief in God, however
manifold may have been the direct motives which co-operated with it.</q> Self is implied
in the simplest act of knowledge. Sensation gives us two things, <hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, black and white;
but I cannot compare them without asserting difference <emph>for me</emph>. Different sensations
make no <emph>knowledge</emph>, without a <emph>self</emph> to bring them together. Upton, Hibbert Lectures,
lecture 2&mdash;<q>You could as easily prove the existence of an external world to a man who
had no senses to perceive it, as you could prove the existence of God to one who had
no consciousness of God.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Positively.&mdash;A first truth is a knowledge which, though developed
upon occasion of observation and reflection, is not derived from observation
and reflection,&mdash;a knowledge on the contrary which has such logical
priority that it must be assumed or supposed, in order to make any observation
or reflection possible. Such truths are not, therefore, recognized
first in order of time; some of them are assented to somewhat late in the
mind's growth; by the great majority of men they are never consciously
formulated at all. Yet they constitute the necessary assumptions upon
which all other knowledge rests, and the mind has not only the inborn
capacity to evolve them so soon as the proper occasions are presented, but
the recognition of them is inevitable so soon as the mind begins to give
account to itself of its own knowledge.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Mansel, Metaphysics, 52, 279&mdash;<q>To describe experience as the cause of the idea of
space would be as inaccurate as to speak of the soil in which it was planted as the
cause of the oak&mdash;though the planting in the soil is the condition which brings into
manifestation the latent power of the acorn.</q> Coleridge: <q>We see before we know that
we have eyes; but when once this is known, we perceive that eyes must have preëxisted
in order to enable us to see.</q> Coleridge speaks of first truths as <q>those necessities
of mind or forms of thinking, which, though revealed to us by experience, must
yet have preëxisted in order to make experience possible.</q> McCosh, Intuitions, 48, 49&mdash;Intuitions
are <q>like flower and fruit, which are in the plant from its embryo, but
may not be actually formed till there have been a stalk and branches and leaves.</q>
Porter, Human Intellect, 501, 519&mdash;<q>Such truths cannot be acquired or assented to first
of all.</q> Some are reached last of all. The moral intuition is often developed late, and
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
sometimes, even then, only upon occasion of corporal punishment. <q>Every man is as
lazy as circumstances will admit.</q> Our physical laziness is occasional; our mental
laziness frequent; our moral laziness incessant. We are too lazy to think, and especially
to think of religion. On account of this depravity of human nature we should expect
the intuition of God to be developed last of all. Men shrink from contact with God
and from the thought of God. In fact, their dislike for the intuition of God leads them
not seldom to deny all their other intuitions, even those of freedom and of right.
Hence the modern <q>psychology without a soul.</q>
</p>

<p>
Schurman, Agnosticism and Religion, 105-115&mdash;<q>The idea of God ... is latest to
develop into clear consciousness ... and must be latest, for it is the unity of the
difference of the self and the not-self, which are therefore presupposed.</q> But <q>it has
not less validity in itself, it gives no less trustworthy assurance of actuality, than the
consciousness of the self, or the consciousness of the not-self.... The consciousness
of God is the logical <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>prius</foreign> of the consciousness of self and of the world. But not,
as already observed, the chronological; for, according to the profound observation of
Aristotle, what in the nature of things is first, is in the order of development last. Just
because God is the first principle of being and knowing, he is the last to be manifested
and known.... The finite and the infinite are both known together, and it is as
impossible to know one without the other as it is to apprehend an angle without the
sides which contain it.</q> For account of the relation of the intuitions to experience, see
especially Cousin, True, Beautiful and Good, 39-64, and History of Philosophy, 2:199-245.
Compare Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, Introd., 1. See also Bascom, in Bib. Sac.,
23:1-47; 27:68-90.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Their criteria.</hi> The criteria by which first truths are to be tested
are three:
</p>

<p>
A. Their universality. By this we mean, not that all men assent to
them or understand them when propounded in scientific form, but that all
men manifest a practical belief in them by their language, actions, and
expectations.
</p>

<p>
B. Their necessity. By this we mean, not that it is impossible to deny
these truths, but that the mind is compelled by its very constitution to
recognize them upon the occurrence of the proper conditions, and to
employ them in its arguments to prove their non-existence.
</p>

<p>
C. Their logical independence and priority. By this we mean that
these truths can be resolved into no others, and proved by no others; that
they are presupposed in the acquisition of all other knowledge, and can
therefore be derived from no other source than an original cognitive power
of the mind.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Instances of the professed and formal denial of first truths:&mdash;the positivist denies
causality; the idealist denies substance; the pantheist denies personality; the necessitarian
denies freedom; the nihilist denies his own existence. A man may in like manner
argue that there is no necessity for an atmosphere; but even while he argues, he
breathes it. Instance the knock-down argument to demonstrate the freedom of the
will. I grant my own existence in the very doubting of it; for <q>cogito, ergo sum,</q> as
Descartes himself insisted, really means <q>cogito, scilicet sum</q>; H. B. Smith: <q>The
statement is analysis, not proof.</q> Ladd, Philosophy of Knowledge, 59&mdash;<q>The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cogito</foreign>,
in barbarous Latin = <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cogitans sum</foreign>: thinking is self-conscious <emph>being</emph>.</q> Bentham: <q>The
word <emph>ought</emph> is an authoritative imposture, and ought to be banished from the realm of
morals.</q> Spinoza and Hegel really deny self-consciousness when they make man a
phenomenon of the infinite. Royce likens the denier of personality to the man who
goes outside of his own house and declares that no one lives there because, when he
looks in at the window, he sees no one inside.
</p>

<p>
Professor James, in his Psychology, assumes the reality of a brain, but refuses to
assume the reality of a soul. This is essentially the position of materialism. But this
assumption of a brain is metaphysics, although the author claims to be writing a
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
psychology without metaphysics. Ladd, Philosophy of Mind, 3&mdash;<q>The materialist
believes in causation proper so long as he is explaining the origin of mind from matter,
but when he is asked to see in mind the cause of physical change he at once
becomes a mere phenomenalist.</q> Royce, Spirit of Modern Philosophy, 400&mdash;<q>I know
that all beings, if only they can count, must find that three and two make five. Perhaps
the angels cannot count; but, if they can, this axiom is true for them. If I met
an angel who declared that his experience had occasionally shown him a three and two
that did <emph>not</emph> make five, I should know at once what sort of an angel he was.</q> On the
criteria of first truths, see Porter, Human Intellect, 510, 511. On denial of them, see
Shedd, Dogmatic Theology, 1:213.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. The Existence of God a first truth.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Its universality.</head>

<p>
That <hi rend='italic'>the knowledge of God's existence answers the first criterion
of universality</hi>, is evident from the following considerations:
</p>

<p>
A. It is an acknowledged fact that the vast majority of men have actually
recognized the existence of a spiritual being or beings, upon whom
they conceived themselves to be dependent.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Vedas declare: <q>There is but one Being&mdash;no second.</q> Max Müller, Origin and
Growth of Religion, 34&mdash;<q>Not the visible sun, moon and stars are invoked, but something
else that cannot be seen.</q> The lowest tribes have conscience, fear death, believe
in witches, propitiate or frighten away evil fates. Even the fetich-worshiper, who
calls the stone or the tree a god, shows that he has already the idea of a God. We must
not measure the ideas of the heathen by their capacity for expression, any more than
we should judge the child's belief in the existence of his father by his success in drawing
the father's picture. On heathenism, its origin and nature, see Tholuck, in Bib.
Repos., 1832:86; Scholz, Götzendienst und Zauberwesen.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Those races and nations which have at first seemed destitute of such
knowledge have uniformly, upon further investigation, been found to possess
it, so that no tribe of men with which we have thorough acquaintance
can be said to be without an object of worship. We may presume that
further knowledge will show this to be true of all.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Moffat, who reported that certain African tribes were destitute of religion, was corrected
by the testimony of his son-in-law, Livingstone: <q>The existence of God and of
a future life is everywhere recognized in Africa.</q> Where men are most nearly destitute
of any formulated knowledge of God, the conditions for the awakening of the idea
are most nearly absent. An apple-tree may be so conditioned that it never bears
apples. <q>We do not judge of the oak by the stunted, flowerless specimens on the edge
of the Arctic Circle.</q> The presence of an occasional blind, deaf or dumb man does
not disprove the definition that man is a seeing, hearing and speaking creature.
Bowne, Principles of Ethics, 154&mdash;<q>We need not tremble for mathematics, even if
some tribes should be found without the multiplication-table.... Sub-moral and
sub-rational existence is always with us in the case of young children; and, if we
should find it elsewhere, it would have no greater significance.</q>
</p>

<p>
Victor Hugo: <q>Some men deny the Infinite; some, too, deny the sun; they are the
blind.</q> Gladden, What is Left? 148&mdash;<q>A man may escape from his shadow by going
into the dark; if he comes under the light of the sun, the shadow is there. A man may
be so mentally undisciplined that he does not recognize these ideas; but let him learn
the use of his reason, let him reflect on his own mental processes, and he will know
that they are necessary ideas.</q> On an original monotheism, see Diestel, in Jahrbuch
für deutsche Theologie, 1860, and vol. 5:669; Max Müller, Chips, 1:337; Rawlinson, in
Present Day Tracts, No. 11; Legge, Religions of China, 8-11; Shedd, Dogmatic Theology,
1:201-208. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Asmus, Indogerm. Relig., 2:1-8; and synopsis in Bib.
Sac., Jan. 1877:167-172.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. This conclusion is corroborated by the fact that those individuals, in
heathen or in Christian lands, who profess themselves to be without any
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
knowledge of a spiritual power or powers above them, do yet indirectly
manifest the existence of such an idea in their minds and its positive influence
over them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Comte said that science would conduct God to the frontier and then bow him out,
with thanks for his provisional services. But Herbert Spencer affirms the existence of
a <q>Power to which no limit in time or space is conceivable, of which all phenomena as
presented in consciousness are manifestations.</q> The intuition of God, though formally
excluded, is implicitly contained in Spencer's system, in the shape of the <q>irresistible
belief</q> in Absolute Being, which distinguishes his position from that of Comte; see
H. Spencer, who says: <q>One truth must ever grow clearer&mdash;the truth that there is an
inscrutable existence everywhere manifested, to which we can neither find nor conceive
beginning or end&mdash;the one absolute certainty that we are ever in the presence of
an infinite and eternal energy from which all things proceed.</q> Mr. Spencer assumes
unity in the underlying Reality. Frederick Harrison sneeringly asks him: <q>Why not
say <q>forces,</q> instead of <q>force</q>?</q> While Harrison gives us a supreme moral ideal
without a metaphysical ground, Spencer gives us an ultimate metaphysical principle
without a final moral purpose. The idea of God is the synthesis of the two,&mdash;<q>They
are but broken lights of Thee, And thou, O Lord, art more than they</q> (Tennyson,
In Memoriam).
</p>

<p>
Solon spoke of ὁ θεός and of τὸ θεῖον, and Sophocles of ὁ μέγας θεός. The term for
<q>God</q> is identical in all the Indo-European languages, and therefore belonged to the
time before those languages separated; see Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:201-208. In Virgil's
Æneid, Mezentius is an atheist, a despiser of the gods, trusting only in his spear
and in his right arm; but, when the corpse of his son is brought to him, his first act is to
raise his hands to heaven. Hume was a sceptic, but he said to Ferguson, as they
walked on a starry night: <q>Adam, there is a God!</q> Voltaire prayed in an Alpine
thunderstorm. Shelley wrote his name in the visitors' book of the inn at Montanvert,
and added: <q>Democrat, philanthropist, atheist</q>; yet he loved to think of a <q>fine
intellectual spirit pervading the universe</q>; and he also wrote: <q>The One remains, the
many change and pass; Heaven's light forever shines, Earth's shadows fly.</q> Strauss
worships the Cosmos, because <q>order and law, reason and goodness</q> are the soul of it.
Renan trusts in goodness, design, ends. Charles Darwin, Life, 1:274&mdash;<q>In my most
extreme fluctuations, I have never been an atheist, in the sense of denying the existence
of a God.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
D. This agreement among individuals and nations so widely separated
in time and place can be most satisfactorily explained by supposing that it
has its ground, not in accidental circumstances, but in the nature of man as
man. The diverse and imperfectly developed ideas of the supreme Being
which prevail among men are best accounted for as misinterpretations and
perversions of an intuitive conviction common to all.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Huxley, Lay Sermons, 163&mdash;<q>There are savages without God, in any proper sense of
the word; but there are none without ghosts.</q> Martineau, Study, 2:353, well replies:
<q>Instead of turning other people into ghosts, and then appropriating one to ourselves
[and attributing another to God, we may add] by way of imitation, we start from the
sense of personal continuity, and then predicate the same of others, under the figures
which keep most clear of the physical and perishable.</q> Grant Allen describes the
higher religions as <q>a grotesque fungoid growth,</q> that has gathered about a primitive
thread of ancestor-worship. But this is to derive the greater from the less. Sayce,
Hibbert Lectures, 358&mdash;<q>I can find no trace of ancestor-worship in the earliest literature
of Babylonia which has survived to us</q>&mdash;this seems fatal to Huxley's and Allen's
view that the idea of God is derived from man's prior belief in spirits of the dead.
C. M. Tyler, in Am. Jour. Theo., Jan. 1899:144&mdash;<q>It seems impossible to deify a dead
man, unless there is embryonic in primitive consciousness a prior concept of Deity.</q>
</p>

<p>
Renouf, Religion of Ancient Egypt, 93&mdash;<q>The whole mythology of Egypt ...
turns on the histories of Ra and Osiris.... Texts are discovered which identify
Osiris and Ra.... Other texts are known wherein Ra, Osiris, Amon, and all other
gods disappear, except as simple <emph>names</emph>, and the unity of God is asserted in the noblest
language of monotheistic religion.</q> These facts are earlier than any known ancestor-worship.
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
<q>They point to an original idea of divinity above humanity</q> (see Hill, Genetic
Philosophy, 317). We must add the idea of the superhuman, before we can turn
any animism or ancestor-worship into a religion. This superhuman element was suggested
to early man by all he saw of nature about him, especially by the sight of the
heavens above, and by what he knew of causality within. For the evidence of a universal
recognition of a superior power, see Flint, Anti-theistic Theories, 250-289, 522-533;
Renouf, Hibbert Lectures for 1879:100; Bib. Sac., Jan. 1884:132-157; Peschel, Races of
Men, 261; Ulrici, Leib und Seele, 688, and Gott und die Natur, 658-670, 758; Tylor, Primitive
Culture, 1:377, 381, 418; Alexander, Evidences of Christianity, 22; Calderwood,
Philosophy of the Infinite, 512; Liddon, Elements of Religion, 50; Methodist Quar. Rev.,
Jan. 1875:1; J. F. Clark, Ten Great Religions, 2:17-21.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Its necessity.</head>

<p>
That <hi rend='italic'>the knowledge of God's existence answers the second criterion
of necessity</hi>, will be seen by considering:
</p>

<p>
A. That men, under circumstances fitted to call forth this knowledge,
cannot avoid recognizing the existence of God. In contemplating finite
existence, there is inevitably suggested the idea of an infinite Being as its
correlative. Upon occasion of the mind's perceiving its own finiteness,
dependence, responsibility, it immediately and necessarily perceives the
existence of an infinite and unconditioned Being upon whom it is dependent
and to whom it is responsible.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We could not recognize the finite as finite, except by comparing it with an already
existing standard&mdash;the Infinite. Mansel, Limits of Religious Thought, lect. 3&mdash;<q>We are
compelled by the constitution of our minds to believe in the existence of an Absolute
and Infinite Being&mdash;a belief which appears forced upon us as the complement of our
consciousness of the relative and finite.</q> Fisher, Journ. Chr. Philos., Jan. 1883:113&mdash;<q>Ego
and non-ego, each being conditioned by the other, presuppose unconditioned
being on which both are dependent. Unconditioned being is the silent presupposition
of all our knowing.</q> Perceived dependent being implies an independent; independent
being is perfectly self-determining; self-determination is personality; perfect self-determination
is infinite Personality. John Watson, in Philos. Rev., Sept. 1893:526&mdash;<q>There
is no consciousness of self apart from the consciousness of other selves and
things; and no consciousness of the world apart from the consciousness of the single
Reality presupposed in both.</q> E. Caird, Evolution of Religion, 64-68&mdash;In every act of
consciousness the primary elements are implied: <q>the idea of the object, or not-self;
the idea of the subject, or self; and the idea of the unity which is presupposed in the
difference of the self and not-self, and within which they act and react on each other.</q>
See Calderwood, Philos. of Infinite, 46, and Moral Philos., 77; Hopkins, Outline Study
of Man, 283-285; Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:211.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. That men, in virtue of their humanity, have a capacity for religion.
This recognized capacity for religion is proof that the idea of God is a necessary
one. If the mind upon proper occasion did not evolve this idea, there
would be nothing in man to which religion could appeal.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>It is the suggestion of the Infinite that makes the line of the far horizon, seen over
land or sea, so much more impressive than the beauties of any limited landscape.</q> In
times of sudden shock and danger, this rational intuition becomes a presentative
intuition,&mdash;men become more conscious of God's existence than of the existence of
their fellow-men and they instinctively cry to God for help. In the commands and
reproaches of the moral nature the soul recognizes a Lawgiver and Judge whose voice
conscience merely echoes. Aristotle called man <q>a political animal</q>; it is still more
true, as Sabatier declares, that <q>man is incurably religious.</q> St. Bernard: <q>Noverim
me, noverim te.</q> O. P. Gifford: <q>As milk, from which under proper conditions cream
does not rise, is not milk, so the man, who upon proper occasion shows no knowledge
of God, is not man, but brute.</q> We must not however expect cream from frozen
milk. Proper environment and conditions are needed.
</p>

<p>
It is the recognition of a divine Personality in nature which constitutes the greatest
merit and charm of Wordsworth's poetry. In his Tintern Abbey, he speaks of <q>A presence
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
that disturbs me with the joy Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime Of something
far more deeply interfused, Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns, And
the round ocean and the living air, And the blue sky and in the mind of man: A motion
and a spirit that impels All thinking things, all objects of all thought, And rolls
through all things.</q> Robert Browning sees God in humanity, as Wordsworth sees God
in nature. In his Hohenstiel-Schwangau he writes: <q>This is the glory, that in all
conceived Or felt or known, I recognize a Mind&mdash;Not mine, but like mine&mdash;for the double
joy Making all things for me, and me for Him.</q> John Ruskin held that the foundation
of beauty in the world is the presence of God in it. In his youth he tells us that
he had <q>a continual perception of sanctity in the whole of nature, from the slightest
thing to the vastest&mdash;an instinctive awe mixed with delight, an indefinable thrill such
as we sometimes imagine to indicate the presence of a disembodied spirit.</q> But it
was not a disembodied, but an embodied, Spirit that he saw. Nitzsch, Christian Doctrine,
§ 7&mdash;<q>Unless education and culture were preceded by an innate consciousness of
God as an operative predisposition, there would be nothing for education and culture
to work upon.</q> On Wordsworth's recognition of a divine personality in nature, see
Knight, Studies, 282-317, 405-426; Hutton, Essays, 2:113.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. That he who denies God's existence must tacitly assume that existence
in his very argument, by employing logical processes whose validity rests
upon the fact of God's existence. The full proof of this belongs under the
next head.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>I am an atheist, God knows</q>&mdash;was the absurd beginning of an argument to disprove
the divine existence. Cutler, Beginnings of Ethics, 22&mdash;<q>Even the Nihilists,
whose first principle is that God and duty are great bugbears to be abolished, assume
that God and duty exist, and they are impelled by a sense of duty to abolish them.</q>
Mrs. Browning, The Cry of the Human: <q><q>There is no God,</q> the foolish saith; But
none, <q>There is no sorrow</q>; And nature oft the cry of faith In bitter need will borrow:
Eyes which the preacher could not school By wayside graves are raised; And lips
say, <q>God be pitiful,</q> Who ne'er said, <q>God be praised.</q></q> Dr. W. W. Keen, when called
to treat an Irishman's aphasia, said: <q>Well, Dennis, how are you?</q> <q>Oh, doctor, I
cannot spake!</q> <q>But, Dennis, you <emph>are</emph> speaking.</q> <q>Oh, doctor, it's many a word I
cannot spake!</q> <q>Well, Dennis, now I will try you. See if you cannot say, <q>Horse.</q></q>
<q>Oh, doctor dear, <q>horse</q> is the very word I cannot spake!</q> On this whole section,
see A. M. Fairbairn, Origin and Development of the Idea of God, in Studies in Philos. of
Relig. and History; Martineau, Religion and Materialism, 45; Bishop Temple, Bampton
Lectures, 1884:37-65.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. Its logical independence and priority.</head>

<p>
That <hi rend='italic'>the knowledge of God's existence answers the third criterion
of logical independence and priority</hi>, may be shown as follows:
</p>

<p>
A. It is presupposed in all other knowledge as its logical condition and
foundation. The validity of the simplest mental acts, such as sense-perception,
self-consciousness, and memory, depends upon the assumption that a
God exists who has so constituted our minds that they give us knowledge
of things as they are.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Pfleiderer, Philos. of Religion, 1:88&mdash;<q>The ground of science and of cognition generally
is to be found neither in the subject nor in the object <hi rend='italic'>per se</hi>, but only in the divine
thinking that combines the two, which, as the common ground of the forms of thinking
in all finite minds, and of the forms of being in all things, makes possible the correspondence
or agreement between the former and the latter, or in a word makes knowledge
of truth possible.</q> 91&mdash;<q>Religious belief is presupposed in all scientific knowledge
as the basis of its possibility.</q> This is the thought of <emph>Psalm 36:10&mdash;<q>In thy light shall
we see light.</q></emph> A. J. Balfour, Foundations of Belief, 303&mdash;<q>The uniformity of nature cannot
be proved from experience, for it is what makes proof from experience possible....
Assume it, and we shall find that facts conform to it.... 309&mdash;The uniformity
of nature can be established only by the aid of that principle itself, and is
necessarily involved in all attempts to prove it.... There must be a God, to justify
our confidence in innate ideas.</q>
</p>

<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>

<p>
Bowne, Theory of Thought and Knowledge, 276&mdash;<q>Reflection shows that the community
of individual intelligences is possible only through an all-embracing Intelligence,
the source and creator of finite minds.</q> Science rests upon the postulate of a
world-order. Huxley: <q>The object of science is the discovery of the rational order
which pervades the universe.</q> This rational order presupposes a rational Author.
Dubois, in New Englander, Nov. 1890:468&mdash;<q>We assume uniformity and continuity,
or we can have no science. An intelligent Creative Will is a genuine scientific hypothesis
[postulate?], suggested by analogy and confirmed by experience, not contradicting
the fundamental law of uniformity but accounting for it.</q> Ritchie, Darwin and
Hegel, 18&mdash;<q>That nature is a system, is the assumption underlying the earliest mythologies:
to fill up this conception is the aim of the latest science.</q> Royce, Relig. Aspect
of Philosophy, 435&mdash;<q>There is such a thing as error; but error is inconceivable unless
there be such a thing as truth; and truth is inconceivable unless there be a seat of
truth, an infinite all-including Thought or Mind; therefore such a Mind exists.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The more complex processes of the mind, such as induction and deduction,
can be relied on only by presupposing a thinking Deity who has
made the various parts of the universe and the various aspects of truth to
correspond to each other and to the investigating faculties of man.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We argue from one apple to the others on the tree. Newton argued from the fall of
an apple to gravitation in the moon and throughout the solar system. Rowland
argued from the chemistry of our world to that of Sirius. In all such argument there
is assumed a unifying thought and a thinking Deity. This is Tyndall's <q>scientific use
of the imagination.</q> <q>Nourished,</q> he says, <q>by knowledge partially won, and
bounded by coöperant reason, imagination is the mightiest instrument of the physical
discoverer.</q> What Tyndall calls <q>imagination</q>, is really insight into the thoughts of
God, the great Thinker. It prepares the way for logical reasoning,&mdash;it is not the product
of mere reasoning. For this reason Goethe called imagination <q>die Vorschule
des Denkens,</q> or <q>thought's preparatory school.</q>
</p>

<p>
Peabody, Christianity the Religion of Nature, 23&mdash;<q>Induction is syllogism, with the
immutable attributes of God for a constant term.</q> Porter, Hum. Intellect, 492&mdash;<q>Induction
rests upon the assumption, as it demands for its ground, that a personal or
thinking Deity exists</q>; 658&mdash;<q>It has no meaning or validity unless we assume that the
universe is constituted in such a way as to presuppose an absolute and unconditioned
originator of its forces and laws</q>; 662&mdash;<q>We analyze the several processes of
knowledge into their underlying assumptions, and we find that the assumption which
underlies them all is that of a self-existent Intelligence who not only can be known by
man, but must be known by man in order that man may know anything besides</q>; see
also pages 486, 508, 509, 518, 519, 585, 616. Harris, Philos. Basis of Theism, 81&mdash;<q>The
processes of reflective thought imply that the universe is grounded in, and is the manifestation
of, reason</q>; 560&mdash;<q>The existence of a personal God is a necessary datum of
scientific knowledge.</q> So also, Fisher, Essays on Supernat. Origin of Christianity,
564, and in Journ. Christ. Philos., Jan. 1883:129, 130.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. Our primitive belief in final cause, or, in other words, our conviction
that all things have their ends, that design pervades the universe,
involves a belief in God's existence. In assuming that there is a universe,
that the universe is a rational whole, a system of thought-relations, we
assume the existence of an absolute Thinker, of whose thought the
universe is an expression.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Pfleiderer, Philos. of Religion, 1:81&mdash;<q>The real can only be thinkable if it is realized
thought, a thought previously thought, which our thinking has only to think again.
Therefore the real, in order to be thinkable for us, must be the realized thought of the
creative thinking of an eternal divine Reason which is presented to our cognitive
thinking.</q> Royce, World and Individual, 2:41&mdash;<q>Universal teleology constitutes the
essence of all facts.</q> A. H. Bradford, The Age of Faith, 142&mdash;<q>Suffering and sorrow
are universal. Either God could prevent them and would not, and therefore he is
neither beneficent nor loving; or else he cannot prevent them and therefore something
is greater than God, and therefore there is no God? But here is the use of reason in
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
the individual reasoning. Reasoning in the individual necessitates the absolute or
universal reason. If there is the absolute reason, then the universe and history are
ordered and administered in harmony with reason; then suffering and sorrow can be
neither meaningless nor final, since that would be the contradiction of reason. That
cannot be possible in the universal and absolute which contradicts reason in man.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
D. Our primitive belief in moral obligation, or, in other words, our
conviction that right has universal authority, involves the belief in God's
existence. In assuming that the universe is a moral whole, we assume the
existence of an absolute Will, of whose righteousness the universe is an
expression.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Pfleiderer, Philos. of Religion, 1:88&mdash;<q>The ground of moral obligation is found
neither in the subject nor in society, but only in the universal or divine Will that combines
both.... 103&mdash;The idea of God is the unity of the true and the good, or of the two
highest ideas which our reason thinks as theoretical reason, but demands as practical
reason.... In the idea of God we find the only synthesis of the world that <emph>is</emph>&mdash;the
world of science, and of the world that <emph>ought to be</emph>&mdash;the world of religion.</q> Seth,
Ethical Principles, 425&mdash;<q>This is not a mathematical demonstration. Philosophy never
is an exact science. Rather is it offered as the only sufficient foundation of the moral
life.... The life of goodness ... is a life based on the conviction that its source and its
issues are in the Eternal and the Infinite.</q> As finite truth and goodness are comprehensible
only in the light of some absolute principle which furnishes for them an ideal
standard, so finite beauty is inexplicable except as there exists a perfect standard with
which it may be compared. The beautiful is more than the agreeable or the useful.
Proportion, order, harmony, unity in diversity&mdash;all these are characteristics of
beauty. But they all imply an intellectual and spiritual Being, from whom they proceed
and by whom they can be measured. Both physical and moral beauty, in finite
things and beings, are symbols and manifestations of Him who is the author and lover
of beauty, and who is himself the infinite and absolute Beauty. The beautiful in
nature and in art shows that the idea of God's existence is logically independent and
prior. See Cousin, The True, the Beautiful, and the Good, 140-153; Kant, Metaphysic of
Ethics, who holds that belief in God is the necessary presupposition of the belief in duty.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
To repeat these four points in another form&mdash;the intuition of an Absolute
Reason is (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) the necessary presupposition of all other knowledge, so
that we cannot know anything else to exist except by assuming first of all
that God exists; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the necessary basis of all logical thought, so that we
cannot put confidence in any one of our reasoning processes except by
taking for granted that a thinking Deity has constructed our minds with
reference to the universe and to truth; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the necessary implication of our
primitive belief in design, so that we can assume all things to exist for a
purpose, only by making the prior assumption that a purposing God exists&mdash;can
regard the universe as a thought, only by postulating the existence
of an absolute Thinker; and (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) the necessary foundation of our conviction
of moral obligation, so that we can believe in the universal authority
of right, only by assuming that there exists a God of righteousness who
reveals his will both in the individual conscience and in the moral universe
at large. We cannot <emph>prove</emph> that God is; but we can show that, in order to
show the existence of any knowledge, thought, reason, conscience, in man,
man must <emph>assume</emph> that God is.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
As Jacobi said of the beautiful: <q>Es kann gewiesen aber nicht bewiesen werden</q>&mdash;it
can be shown, but not proved. Bowne, Metaphysics, 472&mdash;<q>Our objective knowledge
of the finite must rest upon ethical trust in the infinite</q>; 480&mdash;<q>Theism is the
absolute postulate of all knowledge, science and philosophy</q>; <q>God is the most
certain fact of objective knowledge.</q> Ladd, Bib. Sac., Oct. 1877:611-616&mdash;<q>Cogito,
ergo Deus est. We are obliged to postulate a not-ourselves which makes for rationality,
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
as well as for righteousness.</q> W. T. Harris: <q>Even natural science is impossible,
where philosophy has not yet taught that reason made the world, and that nature is a
revelation of the rational.</q> Whately, Logic, 270; New Englander, Oct. 1871, art. on
Grounds of Confidence in Inductive Reasoning; Bib. Sac., 7:415-425; Dorner, Glaubenslehre,
1:197; Trendelenburg, Logische Untersuchungen, ch. <q>Zweck</q>; Ulrici,
Gott und die Natur, 540-626; Lachelier, Du Fondement de l'Induction, 78. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>,
see Janet, Final Causes, 174, note, and 457-464, who holds final cause to be, not an
intuition, but the result of applying the principle of causality to cases which mechanical
laws alone will not explain.
</p>

<p>
Pascal: <q>Nature confounds the Pyrrhonist, and Reason confounds the Dogmatist.
We have an incapacity of demonstration, which the former cannot overcome; we
have a conception of truth which the latter cannot disturb.</q> <q>There is no Unbelief!
Whoever says. <q>To-morrow,</q> <q>The Unknown,</q> <q>The Future,</q> trusts that Power alone.
Nor dares disown.</q> Jones, Robert Browning, 314&mdash;<q>We cannot indeed prove God as
the conclusion of a syllogism, for he is the primary hypothesis of all proof.</q> Robert
Browning, Hohenstiel-Schwangau: <q>I know that he is there, as I am here, By the
same proof, which seems no proof at all, It so exceeds familiar forms of proof</q>;
Paracelsus, 27&mdash;<q>To know Rather consists in opening out a way Whence the
imprisoned splendor may escape Than in effecting entrance for a light Supposed to be
without.</q> Tennyson, Holy Grail: <q>Let visions of the night or day Come as they will,
and many a time they come.... In moments when he feels he cannot die, And knows
himself no vision to himself, Nor the high God a vision, nor that One Who rose
again</q>; The Ancient Sage, 548&mdash;<q>Thou canst not prove the Nameless, O my son! Nor
canst thou prove the world thou movest in. Thou canst not prove that thou art body
alone, Nor canst Thou prove that thou art spirit alone, Nor canst thou prove that thou
art both in one. Thou canst not prove that thou art immortal, no, Nor yet that thou
art mortal. Nay, my son, thou canst not prove that I, who speak with thee, Am not
thyself in converse with thyself. For nothing worthy proving can be proven, Nor yet
disproven: Wherefore be thou wise, Cleave ever to the sunnier side of doubt, And cling
to Faith beyond the forms of Faith.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Other Supposed Sources of our Idea of God's Existence.</head>

<p>
Our proof that the idea of God's existence is a rational intuition will not
be complete, until we show that attempts to account in other ways for the
origin of the idea are insufficient, and require as their presupposition the
very intuition which they would supplant or reduce to a secondary place.
We claim that it cannot be derived from any other source than an original
cognitive power of the mind.
</p>

<p>
1. Not from external revelation,&mdash;whether communicated (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) through
the Scriptures, or (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>)through tradition; for, unless man had from another
source a previous knowledge of the existence of a God from whom such a
revelation might come, the revelation itself could have no authority for
him.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) See Gillespie, Necessary Existence of God, 10; Ebrard, Dogmatik, 1:117; H. B.
Smith, Faith and Philosophy, 18&mdash;<q>A revelation takes for granted that he to whom it
is made has some knowledge of God, though it may enlarge and purify that
knowledge.</q> We cannot prove God from the authority of the Scriptures, and then also
prove the Scriptures from the authority of God. The very idea of Scripture as a revelation
presupposes belief in a God who can make it. Newman Smyth, in New
Englander, 1878:355&mdash;We cannot derive from a sun-dial our knowledge of the existence
of a sun. The sun-dial presupposes the sun, and cannot be understood without
previous knowledge of the sun. Wuttke, Christian Ethics, 2:103&mdash;<q>The voice of the
divine ego does not first come to the consciousness of the individual ego from without;
rather does every external revelation presuppose already this inner one; there
must echo out from within man something kindred to the outer revelation, in order
to its being recognized and accepted as divine.</q>
</p>

<p>
Fairbairn, Studies in Philos. of Relig. and Hist., 21, 22&mdash;<q>If man is dependent on an
outer revelation for his idea of God, then he must have what Schelling happily termed
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
<q>an original atheism of consciousness.</q> Religion cannot, in that case, be rooted in the
nature of man,&mdash;it must be implanted from without.</q> Schurman, Belief in God, 78&mdash;<q>A
primitive revelation of God could only mean that God had endowed man with the
capacity of apprehending his divine original. This capacity, like every other, is
innate, and like every other, it realizes itself only in the presence of appropriate conditions.</q>
Clarke, Christian Theology, 112&mdash;<q>Revelation cannot demonstrate God's
existence, for it must assume it; but it will manifest his existence and character to
men, and will serve them as the chief source of certainty concerning him, for it will
teach them what they could not know by other means.</q>
</p>

<p>
(b) Nor does our idea of God come primarily from tradition, for <q>tradition can perpetuate
only what has already been originated</q> (Patton). If the knowledge thus
handed down is the knowledge of a primitive revelation, then the argument just stated
applies&mdash;that very revelation presupposed in those who first received it, and presupposes
in those to whom it is handed down, some knowledge of a Being from whom
such a revelation might come. If the knowledge thus handed down is simply
knowledge of the results of the reasonings of the race, then the knowledge of God
comes originally from reasoning&mdash;an explanation which we consider further on. On
the traditive theory of religion, see Flint, Theism, 23, 338; Cocker, Christianity and
Greek Philosophy, 86-96; Fairbairn, Studies in Philos. of Relig. and Hist., 14, 15; Bowen,
Metaph. and Ethics, 453, and in Bib. Sac., Oct. 1876; Pfleiderer, Religionsphilos., 312-322.
</p>

<p>
Similar answers must be returned to many common explanations of man's belief in
God: <q>Primus in orbe deos fecit timor</q>; Imagination made religion; Priests
invented religion; Religion is a matter of imitation and fashion. But we ask again:
What caused the fear? Who made the imagination? What made priests possible?
What made imitation and fashion natural? To say that man worships, merely because
he sees other men worshiping, is as absurd as to say that a horse eats hay because he
sees other horses eating it. There must be a hunger in the soul to be satisfied, or
external things would never attract man to worship. Priests could never impose
upon men so continuously, unless there was in human nature a universal belief in a
God who might commission priests as his representatives. Imagination itself requires
some basis of reality, and a larger basis as civilization advances. The fact that belief in
God's existence gets a wider hold upon the race with each added century, shows that,
instead of fear having caused belief in God, the truth is that belief in God has caused
fear; indeed, <emph><q>the fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom</q> (Ps. 111:10)</emph>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. Not from experience,&mdash;whether this mean (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) the sense-perception
and reflection of the individual (Locke), (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the accumulated results of the
sensations and associations of past generations of the race (Herbert Spencer),
or (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the actual contact of our sensitive nature with God, the supersensible
reality, through the religious feeling (Newman Smyth).
</p>

<p>
The first form of this theory is inconsistent with the fact that the idea
of God is not the idea of a sensible or material object, nor a combination
of such ideas. Since the spiritual and infinite are direct opposites of the
material and finite, no experience of the latter can account for our idea of
the former.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
With Locke (Essay on Hum. Understanding, 2:1:4), experience is the passive reception
of ideas by sensation or by reflection. Locke's <q>tabula rasa</q> theory mistakes the
occasion of our primitive ideas for their cause. To his statement: <q>Nihil est in intellectu
nisi quod ante fuerit in sensu,</q> Leibnitz replied: <q>Nisi intellectus ipse.</q>
Consciousness is sometimes called the source of our knowledge of God. But consciousness,
as simply an accompanying knowledge of ourselves and our states, is not
properly the source of any other knowledge. The German <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Gottesbewusstsein</foreign> = not
<q>consciousness of God,</q> but <q>knowledge of God</q>; <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Bewusstsein</foreign> here = not a <q>conknowing,</q>
but a <q>beknowing</q>; see Porter, Human Intellect, 86; Cousin, True,
Beautiful and Good, 48, 49.
</p>

<p>
Fraser, Locke, 143-147&mdash;Sensations are the bricks, and association the mortar, of the
mental house. Bowne, Theory of Thought and Knowledge, 47&mdash;<q>Develope language
by allowing sounds to associate and evolve meaning for themselves? Yet this is the
exact parallel of the philosophy which aims to build intelligence out of sensation....52&mdash;One
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
who does not know how to read would look in vain for meaning in a
printed page, and in vain would he seek to help his failure by using strong spectacles.</q>
Yet even if the idea of God were a product of experience, we should not be warranted
in rejecting it as irrational. See Brooks, Foundations of Zoölogy, 132&mdash;<q>There is no
antagonism between those who attribute knowledge to experience and those who
attribute it to our innate reason; between those who attribute the development of the
germ to mechanical conditions and those who attribute it to the inherent potency of
the germ itself; between those who hold that all nature was latent in the cosmic
vapor and those who believe that everything in nature is immediately intended rather
than predetermined.</q> All these may be methods of the immanent God.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The second form of the theory is open to the objection that the very first
experience of the first man, equally with man's latest experience, presupposes
this intuition, as well as the other intuitions, and therefore cannot be
the cause of it. Moreover, even though this theory of its origin were correct,
it would still be impossible to think of the object of the intuition as
not existing, and the intuition would still represent to us the highest measure
of certitude at present attainable by man. If the evolution of ideas is
toward truth instead of falsehood, it is the part of wisdom to act upon the
hypothesis that our primitive belief is veracious.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Martineau, Study, 2:26&mdash;<q>Nature is as worthy of trust in her processes, as in her
gifts.</q> Bowne, Examination of Spencer, 163, 164&mdash;<q>Are we to seek truth in the minds
of pre-human apes, or in the blind stirrings of some primitive pulp? In that case we
can indeed put away all our science, but we must put away the great doctrine of evolution
along with it. The experience-philosophy cannot escape this alternative: either
the positive deliverances of our mature consciousness must be accepted as they stand,
or all truth must be declared impossible.</q> See also Harris, Philos. Basis Theism, 137-142.
</p>

<p>
Charles Darwin, in a letter written a year before his death, referring to his doubts as to
the existence of God, asks: <q>Can we trust to the convictions of a monkey's mind?</q> We
may reply: <q>Can we trust the conclusions of one who was once a baby?</q> Bowne,
Ethics, 3&mdash;<q>The genesis and emergence of an idea are one thing; its validity is quite
another. The logical value of chemistry cannot be decided by reciting its beginnings
in alchemy; and the logical value of astronomy is independent of the fact that it began
in astrology.... 11&mdash;Even if man came from the ape, we need not tremble for the
validity of the multiplication-table or of the Golden Rule. If we have moral insight,
it is no matter how we got it; and if we have no such insight, there is no help in any
psychological theory.... 159&mdash;We must not appeal to savages and babies to find
what is natural to the human mind.... In the case of anything that is under the
law of development we can find its true nature, not by going back to its crude beginnings,
but by studying the finished outcome.</q> Dawson, Mod. Ideas of Evolution, 13&mdash;<q>If
the idea of God be the phantom of an apelike brain, can we trust to reason or conscience
in any other matter? May not science and philosophy themselves be similar
phantasies, evolved by mere chance and unreason?</q> Even though man came from
the ape, there is no explaining his ideas by the ideas of the ape: <q>A man 's a man for
a' that.</q>
</p>

<p>
We must judge beginnings by endings, not endings by beginnings. It matters not
how the development of the eye took place nor how imperfect was the first sense of
sight, if the eye now gives us correct information of external objects. So it matters
not how the intuitions of right and of God originated, if they now give us knowledge
of objective truth. We must take for granted that evolution of ideas is not from
sense to nonsense. G. H. Lewes, Study of Psychology, 122&mdash;<q>We can understand the
amœba and the polyp only by a light reflected from the study of man.</q> Seth, Ethical
Principles, 429&mdash;<q>The oak explains the acorn even more truly than the acorn explains
the oak.</q> Sidgwick: <q>No one appeals from the artist's sense of beauty to the child's.
Higher mathematics are no less true, because they can be apprehended only by trained
intellect. No strange importance attaches to what was <emph>first</emph> felt or thought.</q> Robert
Browning, Paracelsus: <q>Man, once descried, imprints forever His presence on all lifeless
things.... A supplementary reflux of light Illustrates all the inferior grades,
explains Each back step in the circle.</q> Man, with his higher ideas, shows the meaning
and content of all that led up to him. He is the last round of the ascending ladder,
and from this highest product and from his ideas we may infer what his Maker is.
</p>

<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>

<p>
Bixby, Crisis in Morals, 162, 245&mdash;<q>Evolution simply gave man such <emph>height</emph> that he
could at last discern the stars of moral truth which had previously been below the
horizon. This is very different from saying that moral truths are merely transmitted
products of the experiences of utility.... The germ of the idea of God, as of the
idea of right, must have been in man just so soon as he became man,&mdash;the brute's gaining
it turned him into man. Reason is not simply a register of physical phenomena
and of experiences of pleasure and pain: it is creative also. It discerns the oneness of
things and the supremacy of God.</q> Sir Charles Lyell: <q>The presumption is enormous
that all our faculties, though liable to err, are true in the main and point to real
objects. The religious faculty in man is one of the strongest of all. It existed in the
earliest ages, and instead of wearing out before advancing civilization, it grows
stronger and stronger, and is to-day more developed among the highest races than it
ever was before. I think we may safely trust that it points to a great truth.</q> Fisher,
Nat. and Meth. of Rev., 137, quotes Augustine: <q>Securus judicat orbis terrarum,</q>
and tells us that the intellect is assumed to be an organ of knowledge, however the
intellect may have been evolved. But if the intellect is worthy of trust, so is the moral
nature. George A. Gordon, The Christ of To-day, 103&mdash;<q>To Herbert Spencer, human
history is but an incident of natural history, and force is supreme. To Christianity
nature is only the beginning, and man the consummation. Which gives the higher
revelation of the life of the tree&mdash;the seed, or the fruit?</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The third form of the theory seems to make God a sensuous object, to
reverse the proper order of knowing and feeling, to ignore the fact that in
all feeling there is at least some knowledge of an object, and to forget that
the validity of this very feeling can be maintained only by previously
assuming the existence of a rational Deity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Newman Smyth tells us that feeling comes first; the idea is secondary. Intuitive ideas
are not denied, but they are declared to be direct reflections, in thought, of the feelings.
They are the mind's immediate perception of what it feels to exist. Direct knowledge
of God by intuition is considered to be idealistic, reaching God by inference is regarded
as rationalistic, in its tendency. See Smyth, The Religious Feeling; reviewed by
Harris, in New Englander, Jan., 1878: reply by Smyth, in New Englander, May, 1878.
</p>

<p>
We grant that, even in the case of unregenerate men, great peril, great joy, great sin
often turn the rational intuition of God into a presentative intuition. The presentative
intuition, however, cannot be affirmed to be common to all men. It does not furnish
the foundation or explanation of a universal capacity for religion. Without the
rational intuition, the presentative would not be possible, since it is only the rational
that enables man to receive and to interpret the presentative. The very trust that we
put in feeling presupposes an intuitive belief in a true and good God. Tennyson said
in 1869: <q>Yes, it is true that there are moments when the flesh is nothing to me; when
I know and feel the flesh to be the vision; God and the spiritual is the real; it belongs
to me more than the hand and the foot. You may tell me that my hand and my foot
are only imaginary symbols of my existence,&mdash;I could believe you; but you never,
never can convince me that the <emph>I</emph> is not an eternal Reality, and that the spiritual is not
the real and true part of me.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
3. Not from reasoning,&mdash;because
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The actual rise of this knowledge in the great majority of minds is
not the result of any conscious process of reasoning. On the other hand,
upon occurrence of the proper conditions, it flashes upon the soul with the
quickness and force of an immediate revelation.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The strength of men's faith in God's existence is not proportioned to
the strength of the reasoning faculty. On the other hand, men of greatest
logical power are often inveterate sceptics, while men of unwavering faith
are found among those who cannot even understand the arguments for
God's existence.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) There is more in this knowledge than reasoning could ever have
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
furnished. Men do not limit their belief in God to the just conclusions of
argument. The arguments for the divine existence, valuable as they are for
purposes to be shown hereafter, are not sufficient by themselves to warrant
our conviction that there exists an infinite and absolute Being. It will
appear upon examination that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> argument is capable of proving
only an abstract and ideal proposition, but can never conduct us to the
existence of a real Being. It will appear that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a posteriori</foreign> arguments,
from merely finite existence, can never demonstrate the existence of the
infinite. In the words of Sir Wm. Hamilton (Discussions, 23)&mdash;<q>A demonstration
of the absolute from the relative is logically absurd, as in such
a syllogism we must collect in the conclusion what is not distributed in
the premises</q>&mdash;in short, from finite premises we cannot draw an infinite
conclusion.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Whately, Logic, 290-292; Jevons, Lessons in Logic, 81; Thompson, Outline Laws of
Thought, sections 82-92; Calderwood, Philos. of Infinite, 60-69, and Moral Philosophy, 238;
Turnbull, in Bap. Quarterly, July, 1872:271; Van Oosterzee, Dogmatics, 239; Dove, Logic
of Christian Faith, 21. Sir Wm. Hamilton: <q>Departing from the particular, we admit
that we cannot, in our highest generalizations, rise above the finite.</q> Dr. E. G.
Robinson: <q>The human mind turns out larger grists than are ever put in at the hopper.</q>
There is more in the idea of God than could have come out so small a knot-hole
as human reasoning. A single word, a chance remark, or an attitude of prayer, suggests
the idea to a child. Helen Keller told Phillips Brooks that she had always known
that there was a God, but that she had not known his name. Ladd, Philosophy of
Mind, 119&mdash;<q>It is a foolish assumption that nothing can be certainly known unless it
be reached as the result of a conscious syllogistic process, or that the more complicated
and subtle this process is, the more sure is the conclusion. Inferential knowledge
is always dependent upon the superior certainty of immediate knowledge.</q>
George M. Duncan, in Memorial of Noah Porter, 246&mdash;<q>All deduction rests either on
the previous process of induction, or on the intuitions of time and space which involve
the Infinite and Absolute.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Neither do men arrive at the knowledge of God's existence by inference;
for inference is condensed syllogism, and, as a form of reasoning, is
equally open to the objection just mentioned. We have seen, moreover,
that all logical processes are based upon the assumption of God's existence.
Evidently that which is presupposed in all reasoning cannot itself be proved
by reasoning.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
By inference, we of course mean mediate inference, for in immediate inference (<hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>,
<q>All good rulers are just; therefore no unjust rulers are good</q>) there is no reasoning,
and no progress in thought. Mediate inference is reasoning&mdash;is condensed syllogism;
and what is so condensed may be expanded into regular logical form. Deductive inference:
<q>A negro is a fellow-creature; therefore he who strikes a negro strikes a fellow-creature.</q>
Inductive inference: <q>The first finger is before the second; therefore it is
before the third.</q> On inference, see Martineau, Essays, 1:105-108; Porter, Human
Intellect, 444-448; Jevons, Principles of Science, 1:14, 136-139, 168, 262.
</p>

<p>
Flint, in his Theism, 77, and Herbert, in his Mod. Realism Examined, would reach the
knowledge of God's existence by inference. The latter says God is not demonstrable,
but his existence is inferred, like the existence of our fellow men. But we reply that in
this last case we infer only the finite from the finite, while the difficulty in the case of
God is in inferring the infinite from the finite. This very process of reasoning, moreover,
presupposes the existence of God as the absolute Reason, in the way already
indicated.
</p>

<p>
Substantially the same error is committed by H. B. Smith, Introd. to Chr. Theol., 84-133,
and by Diman, Theistic Argument, 316, 364, both of whom grant an intuitive element,
but use it only to eke out the insufficiency of reasoning. They consider that the intuition
gives us only an abstract idea, which contains in itself no voucher for the existence
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
of an actual being corresponding to the idea, and that we reach real being only by
inference from the facts of our own spiritual natures and of the outward world. But
we reply, in the words of McCosh, that <q>the intuitions are primarily directed to individual
objects.</q> We know, not the infinite in the abstract, but infinite space and time,
and the infinite God. See McCosh, Intuitions, 26, 199, who, however, holds the view here
combated.
</p>

<p>
Schurman, Belief in God, 43&mdash;<q>I am unable to assign to our belief in God a higher
certainty than that possessed by the working hypotheses of science.... 57&mdash;The
nearest approach made by science to our hypothesis of the existence of God lies in the
assertion of the universality of law ... based on the conviction of the unity and
systematic connection of all reality.... 64&mdash;This unity can be found only in self-conscious
spirit.</q> The fault of this reasoning is that it gives us nothing necessary or
absolute. Instances of working hypotheses are the nebular hypothesis in astronomy,
the law of gravitation, the atomic theory in chemistry, the principle of evolution. No
one of these is logically independent or prior. Each of them is provisional, and each
may be superseded by new discovery. Not so with the idea of God. This idea is presupposed
by all the others, as the condition of every mental process and the guarantee
of its validity.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Contents of this Intuition.</head>

<p>
1. In this fundamental knowledge <emph>that</emph> God is, it is necessarily implied
that to some extent men know intuitively <emph>what</emph> God is, namely, (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) a
Reason in which their mental processes are grounded; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) a Power above
them upon which they are dependent; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) a Perfection which imposes law
upon their moral natures; (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) a Personality which they may recognize in
prayer and worship.
</p>

<p>
In maintaining that we have a rational intuition of God, we by no means
imply that a presentative intuition of God is impossible. Such a presentative
intuition was perhaps characteristic of unfallen man; it does belong
at times to the Christian; it will be the blessing of heaven (Mat. 5:8&mdash;<q>the
pure in heart ... shall see God</q>; Rev. 22:4&mdash;<q>they shall see his
face</q>). Men's experiences of face-to-face apprehension of God, in danger
and guilt, give some reason to believe that a presentative knowledge of
God is the normal condition of humanity. But, as this presentative intuition
of God is not in our present state universal, we here claim only that all
men have a rational intuition of God.
</p>

<p>
It is to be remembered, however, that the loss of love to God has greatly
obscured even this rational intuition, so that the revelation of nature and
the Scriptures is needed to awaken, confirm and enlarge it, and the special
work of the Spirit of Christ to make it the knowledge of friendship and
communion. Thus from knowing about God, we come to know God (John
17:3&mdash;<q>This is life eternal, that they should know thee</q>; 2 Tim. 1:12&mdash;<q>I
know him whom I have believed</q>).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Plato said, for substance, that there can be no ὅτι οἶδεν without something of the
ἁ οἶδεν. Harris, Philosophical Basis of Theism, 208&mdash;<q>By rational intuition man knows
that absolute Being <emph>exists</emph>; his knowledge of <emph>what</emph> it is, is progressive with his progressive
knowledge of man and of nature.</q> Hutton, Essays: <q>A haunting presence besets
man behind and before. He cannot evade it. It gives new meanings to his thoughts,
new terror to his sins. It becomes intolerable. He is moved to set up some idol, carved
out of his own nature, that will take its place&mdash;a non-moral God who will not disturb
his dream of rest. It is a righteous Life and Will, and not the mere <emph>idea</emph> of righteousness
that stirs men so.</q> Porter, Hum. Int., 661&mdash;<q>The Absolute is a thinking Agent.</q> The
intuition does not grow in certainty; what grows is the mind's quickness in applying
it and power of expressing it. The intuition is not complex; what is complex is the
Being intuitively cognized. See Calderwood, Moral Philosophy, 232; Lowndes, Philos.
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
of Primary Beliefs, 108-112; Luthardt, Fund. Truths, 157&mdash;Latent faculty of speech is
called forth by speech of others; the choked-up well flows again when debris is cleared
away. Bowen, in Bib. Sac., 33:740-754; Bowne, Theism, 79.
</p>

<p>
Knowledge of a person is turned into personal knowledge by actual communication or
revelation. First, comes the intuitive knowledge of God possessed by all men&mdash;the
assumption that there exists a Reason, Power, Perfection, Personality, that makes correct
thinking and acting possible. Secondly, comes the knowledge of God's being and
attributes which nature and Scripture furnish. Thirdly, comes the personal and presentative
knowledge derived from actual reconciliation and intercourse with God,
through Christ and the Holy Spirit. Stearns, Evidence of Christian Experience, 208&mdash;<q>Christian
experience verifies the claims of doctrine by experiment,&mdash;so transforming
probable knowledge into real knowledge.</q> Biedermann, quoted by Pfleiderer, Grundriss,
18&mdash;<q>God reveals himself to the human spirit, 1. as its infinite <emph>Ground</emph>, in the reason; 2. as
its infinite <emph>Norm</emph>, in the conscience; 3. as its infinite <emph>Strength</emph>, in elevation to religious
truth, blessedness, and freedom.</q>
</p>

<p>
Shall I object to this Christian experience, because only comparatively few have it,
and I am not among the number? Because I have not seen the moons of Jupiter, shall
I doubt the testimony of the astronomer to their existence? Christian experience, like
the sight of the moons of Jupiter, is attainable by all. Clarke, Christian Theology, 113&mdash;<q>One
who will have full proof of the good God's reality must put it to the experimental
test. He must take the good God for real, and receive the confirmation that will
follow. When faith reaches out after God, it finds him.... They who have found
him will be the sanest and truest of their kind, and their convictions will be among the
safest convictions of man.... Those who live in fellowship with the good God will
grow in goodness, and will give practical evidence of his existence aside from their oral
testimony.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. The Scriptures, therefore, do not attempt to prove the existence of
God, but, on the other hand, both assume and declare that the knowledge
that God is, is universal (Rom. 1:19-21, 28, 32; 2:15). God has inlaid
the evidence of this fundamental truth in the very nature of man, so that
nowhere is he without a witness. The preacher may confidently follow the
example of Scripture by assuming it. But he must also explicitly declare
it, as the Scripture does. <q>For the invisible things of him since the
creation of the world are clearly seen</q> (καθορᾶται&mdash;spiritually viewed); the
organ given for this purpose is the νοῦς (νοούμενα); but then&mdash;and this
forms the transition to our next division of the subject&mdash;they are <q>perceived
through the things that are made</q> (τοῖς ποιήμασιν, Rom. 1:20).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
On <emph>Rom. 1:19-21</emph>, see Weiss, Bib. Theol. des N. T., 251, note; also commentaries of Meyer,
Alford, Tholuck, and Wordsworth; τὸ γνωστὸν τοῦ θεοῦ = not <emph><q>that which may be known</q></emph> (Rev.
Vers.) but <emph><q>that which is known</q></emph> of God; νοούμενα καθορᾶται = are clearly seen in that they
are perceived by the reason&mdash;νοούμενα expresses the manner of the καθορᾶται (Meyer);
compare <emph>John 1:9</emph>; <emph>Acts 17:27</emph>; <emph>Rom. 1:28</emph>; <emph>2:15</emph>. On <emph>1 Cor. 15:34</emph>, see Calderwood, Philos. of
Inf., 466&mdash;ἀγνωσίαν Θεοῦ τινὲς ἔχουσι = do not possess the specially exalted knowledge of
God which belongs to believers in Christ (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>1 Jo. 4:7&mdash;<q>every one that loveth is begotten of God,
and knoweth God</q></emph>). On <emph>Eph. 2:12</emph>, see Pope, Theology, 1:240&mdash;ἄθεοι ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ is opposed to
being in Christ, and signifies rather forsaken of God, than denying him or entirely
ignorant of him. On Scripture passages, see Schmid, Bib. Theol. des N. T., 486; Hofmann,
Schriftbeweis, 1:62.
</p>

<p>
E. G. Robinson: <q>The first statement of the Bible is, not that there is a God, but that
<emph><q>In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth</q> (Gen. 1:1)</emph>. The belief in God never was and
never can be the result of logical argument, else the Bible would give us proofs.</q>
Many texts relied upon as <emph>proofs</emph> of God's existence are simply <emph>explications</emph> of the idea
of God, as for example: <emph>Ps. 94:9, 10&mdash;<q>He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the
eye, shall he not see? He that chastiseth the nations, shall not he correct, even he that teacheth man knowledge?</q></emph>
Plato says that God holds the soul by its roots,&mdash;he therefore does not need to demonstrate
to the soul the fact of his existence. Martineau, Seat of Authority, 308, says
well that Scripture and preaching only interpret what is already in the heart which it
addresses: <q>Flinging a warm breath on the inward oracles hid in invisible ink, it renders
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
them articulate and dazzling as the handwriting on the wall. The divine Seer does
not convey to you <emph>his</emph> revelation, but qualifies you to receive <emph>your own</emph>. This mutual
relation is possible only through the common presence of God in the conscience of mankind.</q>
Shedd, Dogmatic Theology, 1:195-220&mdash;<q>The earth and sky make the same
sensible impressions on the organs of a brute that they do upon those of a man; but
the brute never discerns the <emph><q>invisible things</q></emph> of God, his <emph><q>eternal power and godhood</q> (Rom. 1:20)</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Our subconscious activity, so far as it is normal, is under the guidance of the immanent
Reason. Sensation, before it results in thought, has in it logical elements which
are furnished by mind&mdash;not ours, but that of the Infinite One. Christ, the Revealer
of God, reveals God in every man's mental life, and the Holy Spirit may be the principle
of self-consciousness in man as in God. Harris, God the Creator, tells us that <q>man
finds the Reason that is eternal and universal revealing itself in the exercise of his own
reason.</q> Savage, Life after Death, 268&mdash;<q>How do you know that your subliminal
consciousness does not tap Omniscience, and get at the facts of the universe?</q>
Savage negatives this suggestion, however, and wrongly favors the spirit-theory. For
his own experience, see pages 295-329 of his book.
</p>

<p>
C. M. Barrows, in Proceedings of Soc. for Psychical Research, vol. 12, part 30, pages 34-36&mdash;<q>There
is a subliminal agent. What if this is simply one intelligent Actor, filling
the universe with his presence, as the ether fills space; the common Inspirer of all mankind,
a skilled Musician, presiding over many pipes and keys, and playing through each
what music he will? The subliminal self is a universal fountain of energy, and each man
is an outlet of the stream. Each man's personal self is contained in it, and thus each
man is made one with every other man. In that deep Force, the last fact behind which
analysis cannot go, all psychical and bodily effects find their common origin.</q> This
statement needs to be qualified by the assertion of man's ethical nature and distinct
personality; see section of this work on Ethical Monism, in chapter III. But there is
truth here like that which Coleridge sought to express in his Æolian Harp: <q>And what
if all of animated Nature Be but organic harps diversely framed, That tremble into
thought, as o'er them sweeps, Plastic and vast, one intellectual breeze, At once the soul
of each, and God of all?</q> See F. W. H. Myers, Human Personality.
</p>

<p>
Dorner, System of Theology, 1:75&mdash;<q>The consciousness of God is the true fastness
of our self-consciousness.... Since it is only in the God-conscious man that the
innermost personality comes to light, in like manner, by means of the interweaving of
that consciousness of God and of the world, the world is viewed in God (<q>sub specie
eternitatis</q>), and the certainty of the world first obtains its absolute security for the
spirit.</q> Royce, Spirit of Mod. Philosophy, synopsis in N. Y. Nation: <q>The one indubitable
fact is the existence of an infinite self, a Logos or World-mind (345). That it exists
is clear, I. Because idealism shows that real things are nothing more nor less than ideas,
or <q>possibilities of experience</q>; but a mere <q>possibility</q>, as such, is nothing, and a
world of <q>possible</q> experiences, in so far as it is real, must be a world of actual experience
to some self (367). If then there be a real world, it has all the while existed as
ideal and mental, even before it became known to the particular mind with which we
conceive it as coming into connection (368). II. But there is such a real world; for,
when I <emph>think</emph> of an object, when I <emph>mean</emph> it, I do not merely have in mind an idea
resembling it, for I aim at the object, I pick it out, I already in some measure possess
it. The object is then already present in essence to my hidden self (370). As truth
consists in knowledge of the conformity of a cognition to its object, that alone can know
a truth which includes within itself both idea and object. This inclusive Knower is the
Infinite Self (374). With this I am in essence identical (371); it is my larger self (372);
and this larger self alone <emph>is</emph> (379). It includes all reality, and we know other finite
minds, because we are one with them in its unity</q> (409).
</p>

<p>
The experience of George John Romanes is instructive. For years he could recognize
no personal Intelligence controlling the universe. He made four mistakes: 1.
<emph>He forgot that only love can see</emph>, that God is not disclosed to the mere intellect, but only
to the whole man, to the integral mind, to what the Scripture calls <emph><q>the eyes of your heart</q>
(Eph. 1:18)</emph>. Experience of life taught him at last the weakness of mere reasoning, and
led him to depend more upon the affections and intuitions. Then, as one might say, he
gave the X-rays of Christianity a chance to photograph God upon his soul. 2. <emph>He began
at the wrong end</emph>, with matter rather than with mind, with cause and effect rather than
with right and wrong, and so got involved in the mechanical order and tried to interpret
the moral realm by it. The result was that instead of recognizing freedom, responsibility,
sin, guilt, he threw them out as pretenders. But study of conscience and will
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
set him right. He learned to take what be found instead of trying to turn it into something
else, and so came to interpret nature by spirit, instead of interpreting spirit by
nature. 3. <emph>He took the Cosmos by bits</emph>, instead of regarding it as a whole. His early thinking
insisted on finding design in each particular part, or nowhere. But his more mature
thought recognized wisdom and reason in the ordered whole. As he realized that this
is a universe, he could not get rid of the idea of an organizing Mind. He came to see
that the Universe, as a thought, implies a Thinker. 4. <emph>He fancied that nature excludes
God</emph>, instead of being only the method of God's working. When he learned how a thing
was done, he at first concluded that God had not done it. His later thought recognized
that God and nature are not mutually exclusive. So he came to find no difficulty even
in miracles and inspiration; for the God who is in man and of whose mind and will
nature is only the expression, can reveal himself, if need be, in special ways. So George
John Romanes came back to prayer, to Christ, to the church.
</p>

<p>
On the general subject of intuition as connected with our idea of God, see Ladd, in
Bib. Sac., 1877:1-36, 611-616; 1878:619; Fisher, on Final Cause and Intuition, in Journ.
Christ. Philos., Jan. 1883:113-134; Patton, on Genesis of Idea of God, in Jour. Christ.
Philos., Apl. 1883:283-307; McCosh, Christianity and Positivism, 124-140; Mansel, in
Encyc. Brit., 8th ed., vol. 14:604 and 615; Robert Hall, sermon on Atheism; Hutton,
on Atheism, in Essays, 1:3-37; Shairp, in Princeton Rev., March, 1881:264.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Corroborative Evidences Of God's Existence.</head>

<p>
Although the knowledge of God's existence is intuitive, it may be explicated
and confirmed by arguments drawn from the actual universe and
from the abstract ideas of the human mind.
</p>

<p>
Remark 1. These arguments are probable, not demonstrative. For this
reason they supplement each other, and constitute a series of evidences
which is cumulative in its nature. Though, taken singly, none of them can
be considered absolutely decisive, they together furnish a corroboration
of our primitive conviction of God's existence, which is of great practical
value, and is in itself sufficient to bind the moral action of men.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Butler, Analogy, Introd., Bohn's ed., 72&mdash;Probable evidence admits of degrees, from
the highest moral certainty to the lowest presumption. Yet probability is the guide of
life. In matters of morals and religion, we are not to expect mathematical or demonstrative,
but only probable, evidence, and the slightest preponderance of such evidence
may be sufficient to bind our moral action. The truth of our religion, like the truth of
common matters, is to be judged by the whole evidence taken together; for probable
proofs, by being added, not only increase the evidence, but multiply it. Dove,
Logic of Christ. Faith, 24&mdash;Value of the arguments taken together is much greater
than that of any single one. Illustrated from water, air and food, together but not
separately, supporting life; value of £1000 note, not in paper, stamp, writing, signature,
taken separately. A whole bundle of rods cannot be broken, though each rod in the
bundle may be broken separately. The strength of the bundle is the strength of the
whole. Lord Bacon, Essay on Atheism: <q>A little philosophy inclineth man's mind to
atheism, but depth in philosophy bringeth men's minds about to religion. For while
the mind of man looketh upon second causes scattered, it may sometimes rest in them
and go no further, but, when it beholdeth the chain of them confederate and linked
together, it must needs fly to Providence and Deity.</q> Murphy, Scientific Bases of
Faith, 221-223&mdash;<q>The proof of a God and of a spiritual world which is to satisfy us
must consist in a number of different but converging lines of proof.</q>
</p>

<p>
In a case where only circumstantial evidence is attainable, many lines of proof sometimes
converge, and though no one of the lines reaches the mark, the conclusion to
which they all point becomes the only rational one. To doubt that there is a London,
or that there was a Napoleon, would indicate insanity; yet London and Napoleon are
proved by only probable evidence. There is no constraining efficacy in the arguments
for God's existence; but the same can be said of all reasoning that is not demonstrative.
Another interpretation of the facts is <emph>possible</emph>, but no other conclusion is so
<emph>satisfactory</emph>, as that God is; see Fisher, Nature and Method of Revelation, 129. Prof.
Rogers: <q>If in practical affairs we were to hesitate to act until we had absolute and
demonstrative certainty, we should never begin to move at all.</q> For this reason an
old Indian official advised a young Indian judge <q>always to give his verdict, but
always to avoid giving the grounds of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Bowne, Philos. of Theism, 11-14&mdash;<q>Instead of doubting everything that can be
doubted, let us rather doubt nothing until we are compelled to doubt.... In society
we get on better by assuming that men are truthful, and by doubting only for special
reasons, than we should if we assumed that all men are liars, and believed them only
when compelled. So in all our investigations we make more progress if we assume
the truthfulness of the universe and of our own nature than we should if we doubted
both.... The first method seems the more rigorous, but it can be applied only to
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
mathematics, which is a purely subjective science. When we come to deal with
reality, the method brings thought to a standstill.... The law the logician lays down
is this: Nothing may be believed which is not proved. The law the mind actually
follows is this: Whatever the mind demands for the satisfaction of its subjective
interests and tendencies may be assumed as real, in default of positive disproof.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Remark 2. A consideration of these arguments may also serve to explicate
the contents of an intuition which has remained obscure and only half
conscious for lack of reflection. The arguments, indeed, are the efforts of
the mind that already has a conviction of God's existence to give to itself a
formal account of its belief. An exact estimate of their logical value and
of their relation to the intuition which they seek to express in syllogistic
form, is essential to any proper refutation of the prevalent atheistic and
pantheistic reasoning.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Diman, Theistic Argument, 363&mdash;<q>Nor have I claimed that the existence, even, of
this Being can be demonstrated as we demonstrate the abstract truths of science. I
have only claimed that the universe, as a great fact, demands a rational explanation,
and that the most rational explanation that can possibly be given is that furnished in
the conception of such a Being. In this conclusion reason rests, and refuses to rest in
any other.</q> Rückert: <q>Wer Gott nicht fühlt in sich und allen Lebenskreisen, Dem
werdet ihr nicht ihn beweisen mit Beweisen.</q> Harris, Philos. Basis of Theism, 307&mdash;<q>Theology
depends on noetic and empirical science to give the occasion on which the
idea of the Absolute Being arises, and to give content to the idea.</q> Andrew Fuller,
Part of Syst. of Divin., 4:283, questions <q>whether argumentation in favor of the existence
of God has not made more sceptics than believers.</q> So far as this is true, it is due
to an overstatement of the arguments and an exaggerated notion of what is to be
expected from them. See Nitzsch, Christian Doctrine, translation, 140; Ebrard, Dogmatik,
1:119, 120; Fisher, Essays on Supernatural Origin of Christianity, 572, 573; Van
Oosterzee, 238, 241.
</p>

<p>
<q>Evidences of Christianity?</q> said Coleridge, <q>I am weary of the word.</q> The more
Christianity was <emph>proved</emph>, the less it was <emph>believed</emph>. The revival of religion under Whitefield
and Wesley did what all the apologists of the eighteenth century could not do,&mdash;it
quickened men's intuitions into life, and made them practically recognize God.
Martineau, Types, 2:231&mdash;Men can <q>bow the knee to the passing <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Zeitgeist</foreign>, while turning
the back to the consensus of all the ages</q>; Seat of Authority, 312&mdash;<q>Our reasonings
lead to explicit Theism because they start from implicit Theism.</q> Illingworth,
Div. and Hum. Personality, 81&mdash;<q>The proofs are ... attempts to account for and
explain and justify something that already exists; to decompose a highly complex
though immediate judgment into its constituent elements, none of which when
isolated can have the completeness or the cogency of the original conviction taken as a
whole.</q>
</p>

<p>
Bowne, Philos. of Theism, 31, 32&mdash;<q>Demonstration is only a makeshift for helping
ignorance to insight.... When we come to an argument in which the whole nature is
addressed, the argument must seem weak or strong, according as the nature is feebly,
or fully, developed. The moral argument for theism cannot seem strong to one without
a conscience. The argument from cognitive interests will be empty when there is
no cognitive interest. Little souls find very little that calls for explanation or that
excites surprise, and they are satisfied with a correspondingly small view of life and
existence. In such a case we cannot hope for universal agreement. We can only
proclaim the faith that is in us, in hope that this proclamation may not be without
some response in other minds and hearts.... We have only probable evidence for the
uniformity of nature or for the affection of friends. We cannot logically prove either.
The deepest convictions are not the certainties of logic, but the certainties of life.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Remark 3. The arguments for the divine existence may be reduced to
four, namely: I. The Cosmological; II. The Teleological; III. The
Anthropological; and IV. The Ontological. We shall examine these in
order, seeking first to determine the precise conclusions to which they
respectively lead, and then to ascertain in what manner the four may be
combined.
</p>

<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. The Cosmological Argument, or Argument from Change in
Nature.</head>

<p>
This is not properly an argument from effect to cause; for the proposition
that every effect must have a cause is simply identical, and means only
that every caused event must have a cause. It is rather an argument from
begun existence to a sufficient cause of that beginning, and may be accurately
stated as follows:
</p>

<p>
Everything begun, whether substance or phenomenon, owes its existence
to some producing cause. The universe, at least so far as its present form
is concerned, is a thing begun, and owes its existence to a cause which is
equal to its production. This cause must be indefinitely great.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It is to be noticed that this argument moves wholly in the realm of nature. The
argument from man's constitution and beginning upon the planet is treated under
another head (see Anthropological Argument). That the present form of the universe
is not eternal in the past, but has begun to be, not only personal observation but the
testimony of geology assures us. For statements of the argument, see Kant, Critique
of Pure Reason (Bohn's transl.), 370; Gillespie, Necessary Existence of God, 8:34-44;
Bib. Sac., 1849:613; 1850:613; Porter, Hum. Intellect, 570; Herbert Spencer, First Principles,
93. It has often been claimed, as by Locke, Clarke, and Robert Hall, that this
argument is sufficient to conduct the mind to an Eternal and Infinite First Cause. We
proceed therefore to mention
</p>

</quote>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>The defects of the Cosmological Argument.</hi>
</p>

<p>
A. It is impossible to show that the universe, so far as its substance is
concerned, has had a beginning. The law of causality declares, not that
everything has a cause&mdash;for then God himself must have a cause&mdash;but
rather that everything begun has a cause, or in other words, that every
event or change has a cause.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Hume, Philos. Works, 2:411 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, urges with reason that we never saw a world made.
Many philosophers in Christian lands, as Martineau, Essays, 1:206, and the prevailing
opinions of ante-Christian times, have held matter to be eternal. Bowne, Metaphysics,
107&mdash;<q>For being itself, the reflective reason never asks a cause, unless the being show
signs of dependence. It is change that first gives rise to the demand for cause.</q> Martineau,
Types, 1:291&mdash;<q>It is not existence, as such, that demands a cause, but the coming
into existence of what did not exist before. The intellectual law of causality is a law
for phenomena, and not for entity.</q> See also McCosh, Intuitions, 225-241; Calderwood,
Philos. of Infinite, 61. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Murphy, Scient. Bases of Faith, 49, 195, and Habit
and Intelligence, 1:55-67; Knight, Lect. on Metaphysics, lect. ii, p. 19.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Granting that the universe, so far as its phenomena are concerned,
has had a cause, it is impossible to show that any other cause is required
than a cause within itself, such as the pantheist supposes.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Flint, Theism, 65&mdash;<q>The cosmological argument alone proves only force, and no mere
force is God. Intelligence must go with power to make a Being that can be called
God.</q> Diman, Theistic Argument: <q>The cosmological argument alone cannot decide
whether the force that causes change is permanent self-existent mind, or permanent
self-existent matter.</q> Only intelligence gives the basis for an answer. Only mind in
the universe enables us to infer mind in the maker. But the argument from intelligence
is not the Cosmological, but the Teleological, and to this last belong all proofs of Deity
from order and combination in nature.
</p>

<p>
Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 201-296&mdash;Science has to do with those changes which one
portion of the visible universe causes in another portion. Philosophy and theology
deal with the Infinite Cause which brings into existence and sustains the entire series
of finite causes. Do we ask the cause of the stars? Science says: Fire-mist, or an
infinite regress of causes. Theology says: Granted; but this infinite regress demands
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
for its explanation the belief in God. We must believe both in God, and in an endless
series of finite causes. God is the cause of all causes, the soul of all souls: <q>Centre and
soul of every sphere, Yet to each loving heart how near!</q> We do not need, as mere
matter of science, to think of any beginning.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. Granting that the universe most have had a cause outside of itself, it
is impossible to show that this cause has not itself been caused, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, consists
of an infinite series of dependent causes. The principle of causality does
not require that everything begun should be traced back to an uncaused
cause; it demands that we should assign a cause, but not that we should
assign a first cause.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
So with the whole series of causes. The materialist is bound to find a cause for this
series, only when the series is shown to have had a beginning. But the very hypothesis
of an infinite series of causes excludes the idea of such a beginning. An infinite chain
has no topmost link (<hi rend='italic'>versus</hi> Robert Hall); an uncaused and eternal succession does not
need a cause (<hi rend='italic'>versus</hi> Clarke and Locke). See Whately, Logic, 270; New Englander,
Jan. 1874:75; Alexander, Moral Science, 221; Pfleiderer, Die Religion, 1:160-164; Calderwood,
Moral Philos., 225; Herbert Spencer, First Principles, 37&mdash;criticized by Bowne,
Review of H. Spencer, 36. Julius Müller, Doct. Sin, 2:128, says that the causal principle
is not satisfied till by regress we come to a cause which is not itself an effect&mdash;to one
who is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa sui</foreign>; Aids to Study of German Theology, 15-17&mdash;Even if the universe be
eternal, its contingent and relative nature requires us to postulate an eternal Creator;
Diman, Theistic Argument, 86&mdash;<q>While the law of causation does not lead logically up
to the conclusion of a first cause, it compels us to affirm it.</q> We reply that it is not
the law of causation which compels us to affirm it, for this certainly <q>does not lead
logically up to the conclusion.</q> If we infer an uncaused cause, we do it, not by logical
process, but by virtue of the intuitive belief within us. So substantially Secretan, and
Whewell, in Indications of a Creator, and in Hist. of Scientific Ideas, 2:321, 322&mdash;<q>The
mind takes refuge, in the assumption of a First Cause, from an employment inconsistent
with its own nature</q>; <q>we necessarily infer a First Cause, although the palætiological
sciences only point toward it, but do not lead us to it.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
D. Granting that the cause of the universe has not itself been caused,
it is impossible to show that this cause is not finite, like the universe
itself. The causal principle requires a cause no greater than just sufficient
to account for the effect.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We cannot therefore infer an infinite cause, unless the universe is infinite&mdash;which
cannot be proved, but can only be assumed&mdash;and this is assuming an infinite in order
to prove an infinite. All we know of the universe is finite. An infinite universe implies
infinite number. But no number can be infinite, for to any number, however great, a
unit can be added, which shows that it was not infinite before. Here again we see
that the most approved forms of the Cosmological Argument are obliged to avail
themselves of the intuition of the infinite, to supplement the logical process. <hi rend='italic'>Versus</hi>
Martineau, Study, 1:416&mdash;<q>Though we cannot directly infer the infinitude of God from
a limited creation, indirectly we may exclude every other position by resort to its
unlimited scene of existence (space).</q> But this would equally warrant our belief in the
infinitude of our fellow men. Or, it is the argument of Clarke and Gillespie (see Ontological
Argument below). Schiller, Die Grösse der Welt, seems to hold to a boundless
universe. He represents a tired spirit as seeking the last limit of creation. A second
pilgrim meets him from the spaces beyond with the words: <q>Steh! du segelst umsonst,&mdash;vor
dir Unendlichkeit</q>&mdash;<q>Hold! thou journeyest in vain,&mdash;before thee is only Infinity.</q>
On the law of parsimony, see Sir Wm. Hamilton, Discussions, 628.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>The value of the Cosmological Argument</hi>, then, is simply this,&mdash;it
proves the existence of some cause of the universe indefinitely great.
When we go beyond this and ask whether this cause is a cause of being,
or merely a cause of change, to the universe; whether it is a cause apart
from the universe, or one with it; whether it is an eternal cause, or a cause
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
dependent upon some other cause; whether it is intelligent or unintelligent,
infinite or finite, one or many,&mdash;this argument cannot assure us.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
On the whole argument, see Flint, Theism, 93-130; Mozley, Essays, Hist. and Theol.,
2:414-444; Hedge, Ways of the Spirit, 148-154; Studien und Kritiken, 1876:9-31.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. The Teleological Argument, or Argument from Order and
Useful Collocation in Nature.</head>

<p>
This is not properly an argument from design to a designer; for that
design implies a designer is simply an identical proposition. It may be
more correctly stated as follows: Order and useful collocation pervading a
system respectively imply intelligence and purpose as the cause of that order
and collocation. Since order and useful collocation pervade the universe,
there must exist an intelligence adequate to the production of this order,
and a will adequate to direct this collocation to useful ends.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Etymologically, <q>teleological argument</q> = argument to ends or final causes, that is,
<q>causes which, beginning as a thought, work themselves out into a fact as an end or
result</q> (Porter, Hum. Intellect, 592-618);&mdash;health, for example, is the final cause of
exercise, while exercise is the efficient cause of health. This definition of the argument
would be broad enough to cover the proof of a designing intelligence drawn from the
constitution of man. This last, however, is treated as a part of the Anthropological
Argument, which follows this, and the Teleological Argument covers only the proof
of a designing intelligence drawn from nature. Hence Kant, Critique of Pure Reason
(Bohn's trans.), 381, calls it the physico-theological argument. On methods of stating
the argument, see Bib. Sac., Oct. 1867:625. See also Hedge, Ways of the Spirit, 155-185;
Mozley, Essays Hist. and Theol., 2:365-413.
</p>

<p>
Hicks, in his Critique of Design-Arguments, 347-389, makes two arguments instead of
one: (1) the argument from <emph>order</emph> to <emph>intelligence</emph>, to which he gives the name Eutaxiological;
(2) the argument from <emph>adaptation</emph> to <emph>purpose</emph>, to which he would restrict the
name Teleological. He holds that teleology proper cannot prove <emph>intelligence</emph>, because in
speaking of <q>ends</q> at all, it must assume the very intelligence which it seeks to prove;
that it actually does prove simply the <emph>intentional exercise</emph> of an intelligence whose existence
has been previously established. <q>Circumstances, forces or agencies converging
to a definite rational result imply volition&mdash;imply that this result is intended&mdash;is an end.
This is the major premise of this new teleology.</q> He objects to the term <q>final cause.</q>
The end is not a cause at all&mdash;it is a motive. The characteristic element of cause is
power to produce an effect. Ends have no such power. The will may choose them or
set them aside. As already assuming intelligence, ends cannot prove intelligence.
</p>

<p>
With this in the main we agree, and count it a valuable help to the statement and
understanding of the argument. In the very observation of <emph>order</emph>, however, as well as
in arguing from it, we are obliged to assume the same all-arranging intelligence. We
see no objection therefore to making Eutaxiology the first part of the Teleological
Argument, as we do above. See review of Hicks, in Meth. Quar. Rev., July, 1883:569-576.
We proceed however to certain
</p>

</quote>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Further explanations.</hi>
</p>

<p>
A. The major premise expresses a primitive conviction. It is not
invalidated by the objections: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) that order and useful collocation may
exist without being purposed&mdash;for we are compelled by our very mental
constitution to deny this in all cases where the order and collocation
pervade a system: (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) that order and useful collocation may result from the
mere operation of physical forces and laws&mdash;for these very forces and laws
imply, instead of excluding, an originating and superintending intelligence
and will.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Janet, in his work on Final Causes, 8, denies that finality is a primitive conviction, like
causality, and calls it the result of an induction. He therefore proceeds from (1)
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
marks of order and useful collocation to (2) finality in nature, and then to (3) an intelligent
cause of this finality or <q>pre-conformity to future event.</q> So Diman, Theistic
Argument, 105, claims simply that, as change requires cause, so orderly change requires
intelligent cause. We have shown, however, that induction and argument of every
kind presupposes intuitive belief in final cause. Nature does not give us final cause;
but no more does she give us efficient cause. Mind gives us both, and gives them as
clearly upon one experience as after a thousand. Ladd: <q>Things have mind in them:
else they could not be minded by us.</q> The Duke of Argyll told Darwin that it seemed
to him wholly impossible to ascribe the adjustments of nature to any other agency than
that of mind. <q>Well,</q> said Darwin, <q>that impression has often come upon me with
overpowering force. But then, at other times, it all seems&mdash;;</q> and then he passed
his hands over his eyes, as if to indicate the passing of a vision out of sight. Darwinism
is not a refutation of ends in nature, but only of a particular theory with regard to the
way in which ends are realized in the organic world. Darwin would begin with an
infinitesimal germ, and make all the subsequent development unteleological; see
Schurman, Belief in God, 193.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Illustration of unpurposed order in the single throwing of <q>double sixes,</q>&mdash;constant
throwing of double sixes indicates design. So arrangement of detritus at
mouth of river, and warming pans sent to the West Indies,&mdash;useful but not purposed.
Momerie, Christianity and Evolution, 72&mdash;<q>It is only within narrow limits that seemingly
purposeful arrangements are produced by chance. And therefore, as the signs
of purpose increase, the presumption in favor of their accidental origin diminishes.</q>
Elder, Ideas from Nature, 81, 82&mdash;<q>The uniformity of a boy's marbles shows them to
be products of design. A single one might be accidental, but a dozen cannot be. So
atomic uniformity indicates manufacture.</q> Illustrations of purposed order, in Beattie's
garden, Tillotson's blind men, Kepler's salad. Dr. Carpenter: <q>The atheist is like
a man examining the machinery of a great mill, who, finding that the whole is moved
by a shaft proceeding from a brick wall, infers that the shaft is a sufficient explanation
of what he sees, and that there is no moving power behind it.</q> Lord Kelvin: <q>The
atheistic idea is nonsensical.</q> J. G. Paton, Life, 2:191&mdash;The sinking of a well on the
island of Aniwa convinces the cannibal chief Namakei that Jehovah God exists, the
invisible One. See Chauncey Wright, in N. Y. Nation, Jan. 15, 1874; Murphy, Scientific
Bases of Faith, 208.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Bowne, Review of Herbert Spencer, 231-247&mdash;<q>Law is <emph>method</emph>, not <emph>cause</emph>. A
man cannot offer the very fact to be explained, as its sufficient explanation.</q> Martineau,
Essays, 1:144&mdash;<q>Patterned damask, made not by the weaver, but by the loom?</q>
Dr. Stevenson: <q>House requires no architect, because it is built by stone-masons and
carpenters?</q> Joseph Cook: <q>Natural law without God behind it is no more than a
glove without a hand in it, and all that is done by the gloved hand of God in nature is
done by the hand and not by the glove. Evolution is a process, not a power; a method
of operation, not an operator. A book is not written <emph>by</emph> the laws of spelling and grammar,
but <emph>according</emph> to those laws. So the book of the universe is not written by the
laws of heat, electricity, gravitation, evolution, but according to those laws.</q> G. F.
Wright, Ant. and Orig. of Hum. Race, lecture IX&mdash;<q>It is impossible for evolution to
furnish evidence which shall drive design out of nature. It can only drive it back to
an earlier point of entrance, thereby increasing our admiration for the power of the
Creator to accomplish ulterior designs by unlikely means.</q>
</p>

<p>
Evolution is only the method of God. It has to do with the <emph>how</emph>, not with the <emph>why</emph>,
of phenomena, and therefore is not inconsistent with design, but rather is a new and
higher illustration of design. Henry Ward Beecher: <q>Design by wholesale is greater
than design by retail.</q> Frances Power Cobbe: <q>It is a singular fact that, whenever
we find out <emph>how</emph> a thing is done, our first conclusion seems to be that <emph>God</emph> did not
do it.</q> Why should we say: <q>The more law, the less God?</q> The theist refers the
phenomena to a cause that knows itself and what it is doing; the atheist refers them
to a power which knows nothing of itself and what it is doing (Bowne). George John
Romanes said that, if God be immanent, then all natural causation must appear to be
mechanical, and it is no argument against the divine origin of a thing to prove it due
to natural causation: <q>Causes in nature do not obviate the necessity of a cause in
nature.</q> Shaler, Interpretation of Nature, 47&mdash;Evolution shows that the direction of
affairs is under control of something like our own intelligence: <q>Evolution spells
Purpose.</q> Clarke, Christ. Theology, 105&mdash;<q>The modern doctrine of evolution has
been awake to the existence of innumerable ends <emph>within</emph> the universe, but not to the
one great end <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> the universe itself.</q> Huxley, Critiques and Addresses, 274, 275, 307&mdash;<q>The
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
teleological and mechanical views of the universe are not mutually exclusive.</q>
Sir William Hamilton, Metaphysics: <q>Intelligence stands first in the order of existence.
Efficient causes are preceded by final causes.</q> See also Thornton, Old Fashioned
Ethics, 199-265; Archbp. Temple, Bampton Lect., 1884:99-123; Owen, Anat. of Vertebrates,
3:796; Peirce, Ideality in the Physical Sciences, 1-35; Newman Smyth, Through
Science to Faith, 96; Fisher, Nat. and Meth. of Rev., 135.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The minor premise expresses a working-principle of all science,
namely, that all things have their uses, that order pervades the universe, and
that the methods of nature are rational methods. Evidences of this appear
in the correlation of the chemical elements to each other; in the fitness of
the inanimate world to be the basis and support of life; in the typical forms
and unity of plan apparent in the organic creation; in the existence and
coöperation of natural laws; in cosmical order and compensations.
</p>

<p>
This minor premise is not invalidated by the objections: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That we
frequently misunderstand the end actually subserved by natural events and
objects; for the principle is, not that we necessarily know the actual end,
but that we necessarily believe that there is some end, in every case of
systematic order and collocation. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That the order of the universe is
manifestly imperfect; for this, if granted, would argue, not absence of
contrivance, but some special reason for imperfection, either in the limitations
of the contriving intelligence itself, or in the nature of the end sought
(as, for example, correspondence with the moral state and probation of
sinners).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The evidences of order and useful collocation are found both in the indefinitely small
and the indefinitely great. The molecules are manufactured articles; and the compensations
of the solar system which provide that a secular flattening of the earth's
orbit shall be made up for by a secular rounding of that same orbit, alike show an
intelligence far transcending our own; see Cooke, Religion and Chemistry, and Credentials
of Science, 23&mdash;<q>Beauty is the harmony of relations which perfect fitness produces;
law is the prevailing principle which underlies that harmony. Hence both
beauty and law imply design. From energy, fitness, beauty, order, sacrifice, we argue
might, skill, perfection, law, and love in a Supreme Intelligence. Christianity implies
design, and is the completion of the design argument.</q> Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion,
1:168&mdash;<q>A good definition of beauty is immanent purposiveness, the teleological ideal
background of reality, the shining of the Idea through phenomena.</q>
</p>

<p>
Bowne, Philos. Theism, 85&mdash;<q>Design is never causal. It is only ideal, and it demands
an efficient cause for its realization. If ice is not to sink, and to freeze out life, there
must be some molecular structure which shall make its bulk greater than that of an
equal weight of water.</q> Jackson, Theodore Parker, 355&mdash;<q>Rudimentary organs are
like the silent letters in many words,&mdash;both are witnesses to a past history; and there
is intelligence in their preservation.</q> Diman, Theistic Argument: <q>Not only do we
observe in the world the change which is the basis of the Cosmological Argument, but
we perceive that this change proceeds according to a fixed and invariable rule. In inorganic
nature, general order, or <emph>regularity</emph>; in organic nature, special order or <emph>adaptation</emph>.</q>
Bowne, Review of H. Spencer, 113-115, 224-230: <q>Inductive science proceeds upon
the postulate that the reasonable and the natural are one.</q> This furnished the guiding
clue to Harvey and Cuvier; see Whewell, Hist. Induct. Sciences, 2:489-491. Kant:
<q>The anatomist must assume that nothing in man is in vain.</q> Aristotle: <q>Nature
makes nothing in vain.</q> On molecules as manufactured articles, see Maxfield, in Nature,
Sept. 25, 1873. See also Tulloch, Theism, 116, 120; LeConte, Religion and Science,
lect. 2 and 3; McCosh, Typical Forms, 81, 420; Agassiz, Essay on Classification, 9, 10;
Bib. Sac., 1849:626 and 1850:613; Hopkins, in Princeton Review, 1882:181.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Design, in fact that rivers always run by large towns? that springs are always
found at gambling places? Plants made for man, and man for worms? Voltaire:
<q>Noses are made for spectacles&mdash;let us wear them!</q> Pope: <q>While man exclaims
<q>See all things for my use,</q> <q>See man for mine,</q> replies the pampered goose.</q> Cherries
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
do not ripen in the cold of winter when they do not taste as well, and grapes do
not ripen in the heat of summer when the new wine would turn to vinegar? Nature
divides melons into sections for convenience in family eating? Cork-tree made for
bottle-stoppers? The child who was asked the cause of salt in the ocean, attributed
it to codfish, thus dimly confounding final cause with efficient cause. Teacher:
<q>What are marsupials?</q> Pupil: <q>Animals that have pouches in their stomachs.</q>
Teacher: <q>And what do they have pouches for?</q> Pupil: <q>To crawl into and conceal
themselves in, when they are pursued.</q> Why are the days longer in summer than
in winter? Because it is the property of all natural objects to elongate under the
influence of heat. A Jena professor held that doctors do not exist because of disease,
but that diseases exist precisely in order that there may be doctors. Kepler was an
astronomical Don Quixote. He discussed the claims of eleven different damsels to
become his second wife, and he likened the planets to huge animals rushing through
the sky. Many of the objections to design arise from confounding a part of the
creation with the whole, or a structure in the process of development with a structure
completed. For illustrations of mistaken ends, see Janet, Final Causes.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Alphonso of Castile took offense at the Ptolemaic System, and intimated that, if
he had been consulted at the creation, he could have suggested valuable improvements.
Lange, in his History of Materialism, illustrates some of the methods of
nature by millions of gun barrels shot in all directions to kill a single hare; by ten thousand
keys bought at haphazard to get into a shut room; by building a city in order to
obtain a house. Is not the ice a little overdone about the poles? See John Stuart
Mill's indictment of nature, in his posthumous Essays on Religion, 29&mdash;<q>Nature
impales men, breaks men as if on a wheel, casts them to be devoured by wild beasts,
crushes them with stones like the first Christian martyr, starves them with hunger,
freezes them with cold, poisons them with the quick or slow venom of her exhalations,
and has hundreds of other hideous deaths in reserve, such as the ingenious cruelty of
a Nabis or a Domitian never surpassed.</q> So argue Schopenhauer and Von Hartmann.
</p>

<p>
The doctrine of evolution answers many of these objections, by showing that order
and useful collocation in the system as a whole is necessarily and cheaply purchased
by imperfection and suffering in the initial stages of development. The question is:
Does the system as a whole imply design? My opinion is of no value as to the usefulness
of an intricate machine the purpose of which I do not know. If I stand at the
beginning of a road and do not know whither it leads, it is presumptuous in me to
point out a more direct way to its destination. Bowne, Philos. of Theism, 20-22&mdash;<q>In
order to counterbalance the impressions which apparent disorder and immorality in
nature make upon us, we have to assume that the universe at its root is not only
rational, but good. This is faith, but it is an act on which our whole moral life
depends.</q> Metaphysics, 165&mdash;<q>The same argument which would deny mind in nature
denies mind in man.</q> Fisher, Nat. and Meth. of Rev., 264&mdash;<q>Fifty years ago, when
the crane stood on top of the tower of unfinished Cologne Cathedral, was there no evidence
of design in the whole structure?</q> Yet we concede that, so long as we cannot
with John Stuart Mill explain the imperfections of the universe by any limitations in
the Intelligence which contrived it, we are shut up to regarding them as intended to
correspond with the moral state and probation of sinners which God foresaw and provided
for at the creation. Evil things in the universe are symbols of sin, and helps to
its overthrow. See Bowne, Review of H. Spencer, 264, 265; McCosh, Christ. and Positivism,
82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Martineau, Essays, 1:50, and Study, 1:351-398; Porter, Hum. Intellect,
599; Mivart, Lessons from Nature, 366-371; Princeton Rev., 1878:272-303; Shaw, on
Positivism.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Defects of the Teleological Argument.</hi> These attach not to the
premises but to the conclusion sought to be drawn therefrom.
</p>

<p>
A. The argument cannot prove a personal God. The order and useful
collocations of the universe may be only the changing phenomena of an
impersonal intelligence and will, such as pantheism supposes. The finality
may be only immanent finality.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
There is such a thing as immanent and unconscious finality. National spirit, without
set purpose, constructs language. The bee works unconsciously to ends. Strato of
Lampsacus regarded the world as a vast animal. Aristotle, Phys., 2:8&mdash;<q>Plant the
ship-builder's skill within the timber itself, and you have the mode in which nature
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
produces.</q> Here we see a dim anticipation of the modern doctrine of development
from within instead of creation from without. Neander: <q>The divine work goes on
from within outward.</q> John Fiske: <q>The argument from the watch has been superseded
by the argument from the flower.</q> Iverach, Theism, 91&mdash;<q>The effect of evolution
has been simply to transfer the cause from a mere external influence working from
without to an immanent rational principle.</q> Martineau, Study, 1:349, 350&mdash;<q>Theism
is in no way committed to the doctrine of a God external to the world ... nor does
intelligence require, in order to gain an object, to give it externality.</q>
</p>

<p>
Newman Smyth, Place of Death, 62-80&mdash;<q>The universe exists in some all-pervasive
Intelligence. Suppose we could see a small heap of brick, scraps of metal, and pieces
of mortar, gradually shaping themselves into the walls and interior structure of a
building, adding needed material as the work advanced, and at last presenting in its
completion a factory furnished with varied and finely wrought machinery. Or, a
locomotive carrying a process of self-repair to compensate for wear, growing and
increasing in size, detaching from itself at intervals pieces of brass or iron endowed with
the power of growing up step by step into other locomotives capable of running themselves
and of reproducing new locomotives in their turn.</q> So nature in its separate
parts may seem mechanical, but as a whole it is rational. Weismann does not <q>disown
a directive power,</q>&mdash;only this power is <q>behind the mechanism as its final cause
... it must be teleological.</q>
</p>

<p>
Impressive as are these evidences of intelligence in the universe as a whole, and
increased in number as they are by the new light of evolution, we must still hold that
nature alone cannot prove that this intelligence is personal. Hopkins, Miscellanies,
18-36&mdash;<q>So long as there is such a thing as impersonal and adapting intelligence in the
brute creation, we cannot necessarily infer from unchanging laws a free and personal
God.</q> See Fisher, Supernat. Origin of Christianity, 576-578. Kant shows that the
argument does not prove intelligence apart from the world (Critique, 370). We must
bring mind to the world, if we would find mind in it. Leave out man, and nature cannot
be properly interpreted: the intelligence and will in nature may still be unconscious.
But, taking in man, we are bound to get our idea of the intelligence and will in nature
from the highest type of intelligence and will we know, and that is man's. <q>Nullus in
microcosmo spiritus, nullus in macrocosmo Deus.</q> <q>We receive but what we give,
And in our life alone does Nature live.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Teleological Argument therefore needs to be supplemented by the Anthropological
Argument, or the argument from the mental and moral constitution of man.
By itself, it does not prove a Creator. See Calderwood, Moral Philosophy, 26; Ritter, Hist.
Anc. Philos., bk. 9, chap. 6; Foundations of our Faith, 38; Murphy, Scientific Bases,
215; Habit and Intelligence, 2:6, and chap. 27. On immanent finality, see Janet, Final
Causes, 345-415; Diman, Theistic Argument, 201-203. Since righteousness belongs only
to personality, this argument cannot prove righteousness in God. Flint, Theism, 66&mdash;<q>Power
and Intelligence alone do not constitute God, though they be infinite. A being
may have these, and, if lacking righteousness, may be a devil.</q> Here again we see the
need of the Anthropological Argument to supplement this.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Even if this argument could prove personality in the intelligence
and will that originated the order of the universe, it could not prove either
the unity, the eternity, or the infinity of God; not the unity&mdash;for the useful
collocations of the universe might be the result of oneness of counsel,
instead of oneness of essence, in the contriving intelligence; not the eternity&mdash;for
a created demiurge might conceivably have designed the universe;
not the infinity&mdash;since all marks of order and collocation within our observation
are simply finite.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Diman asserts (Theistic Argument, 114) that all the phenomena of the universe must
be due to the same source&mdash;since all alike are subject to the same method of sequence,
<hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, gravitation&mdash;and that the evidence points us irresistibly to some <emph>one</emph> explanatory
cause. We can regard this assertion only as the utterance of a primitive belief in a first
cause, not as the conclusion of logical demonstration, for we know only an infinitesimal
part of the universe. From the point of view of the intuition of an Absolute Reason,
however, we can cordially assent to the words of F. L. Patton: <q>When we consider
Matthew Arnold's <q>stream of tendency,</q> Spencer's <q>unknowable,</q> Schopenhauer's
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
<q>world as will,</q> and Hartmann's elaborate defence of finality as the product of unconscious
intelligence, we may well ask if the theists, with their belief in one personal
God, are not in possession of the only hypothesis that can save the language of these
writers from the charge of meaningless and idiotic raving</q> (Journ. Christ. Philos.,
April, 1883:283-307).
</p>

<p>
The ancient world, which had only the light of nature, believed in many gods.
William James, Will to Believe, 44&mdash;<q>If there be a divine Spirit of the universe, nature,
such as we know her, cannot possibly be its <emph>ultimate word</emph> to man. Either there is
no spirit revealed in nature, or else it is inadequately revealed there; and (as all
the higher religions have assumed) what we call visible nature, or <emph>this</emph> world, must be
but a veil and surface-show whose full meaning resides in a supplementary unseen, or
<emph>other</emph> world.</q> Bowne, Theory of Thought and Knowledge, 234&mdash;<q>But is not intelligence
itself the mystery of mysteries?... No doubt, intellect is a great mystery....
But there is a choice in mysteries. Some mysteries leave other things clear, and some
leave things as dark and impenetrable as ever. The former is the case with the mystery
of intelligence. It makes possible the comprehension of everything but itself.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>The value of the Teleological Argument</hi> is simply this,&mdash;it proves
from certain useful collocations and instances of order which have clearly
had a beginning, or in other words, from the present harmony of the universe,
that there exists an intelligence and will adequate to its contrivance.
But whether this intelligence and will is personal or impersonal, creator or
only fashioner, one or many, finite or infinite, eternal or owing its being to
another, necessary or free, this argument cannot assure us.
</p>

<p>
In it, however, we take a step forward. The causative power which we
have proved by the Cosmological Argument has now become an intelligent
and voluntary power.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
John Stuart Mill, Three Essays on Theism, 168-170&mdash;<q>In the present state of our
knowledge, the adaptations in nature afford a large balance of probability in favor of
causation by intelligence.</q> Ladd holds that, whenever one being acts upon its like,
each being undergoes changes of state that belong to its own nature under the circumstances.
Action of one body on another never consists in transferring the state of
one being to another. Therefore there is no more difficulty in beings that are unlike
acting on one another than in beings that are like. We do not transfer ideas to other
minds,&mdash;we only rouse them to develop their own ideas. So force also is positively
not transferable. Bowne, Philos. of Theism, 49, begins with <q>the conception of things
interacting according to law and forming an intelligible system. Such a system
cannot be construed by thought without the assumption of a unitary being which is
the fundamental reality of the system. 53&mdash;No passage of influences or forces will
avail to bridge the gulf, so long as the things are regarded as independent. 56&mdash;The
system itself cannot explain this interaction, for the system is only the members of it.
There must be some being in them which is their reality, and of which they are in some
sense phases or manifestations. In other words, there must be a basal monism.</q>
All this is substantially the view of Lotze, of whose philosophy see criticism in Stählin's
Kant, Lotze, and Ritschl, 116-156, and especially 123. Falckenberg, Gesch. der neueren
Philosophie, 454, shows as to Lotze's view that his assumption of monistic unity and
continuity does not explain how change of condition in one thing should, as equalization
or compensation, follow change of condition in another thing. Lotze explains
this <emph>actuality</emph> by the ethical conception of an all-embracing Person. On the whole argument,
see Bib. Sac., 1849:634; Murphy, Sci. Bases, 216; Flint, Theism, 131-210; Pfleiderer,
Die Religion, 1:164-174; W. R. Benedict, on Theism and Evolution, in Andover Rev.,
1886:307-350, 607-622.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. The Anthropological Argument, or Argument from Man's
Mental and Moral Nature.</head>

<p>
This is an argument from the mental and moral condition of man to
the existence of an Author, Lawgiver, and End. It is sometimes called
the Moral Argument.
</p>

<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The common title <q>Moral Argument</q> is much too narrow, for it seems to take
account only of conscience in man, whereas the argument which this title so imperfectly
designates really proceeds from man's intellectual and emotional, as well as from
his moral, nature. In choosing the designation we have adopted, we desire, moreover,
to rescue from the mere physicist the term <q>Anthropology</q>&mdash;a term to which he has
attached altogether too limited a signification, and which, in his use of it, implies
that man is a mere animal,&mdash;to him Anthropology is simply the study of <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>la bête
humaine</foreign>. Anthropology means, not simply the science of man's physical nature,
origin, and relations, but also the science which treats of his higher spiritual being.
Hence, in Theology, the term Anthropology designates that division of the subject
which treats of man's spiritual nature and endowments, his original state and his
subsequent apostasy. As an argument, therefore, from man's mental and moral
nature, we can with perfect propriety call the present argument the Anthropological
Argument.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The argument is a complex one, and may be divided into three parts.
</p>

<p>
1. Man's intellectual and moral nature must have had for its author an
intellectual and moral Being. The elements of the proof are as follows:&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>)
Man, as an intellectual and moral being, has had a beginning upon
the planet. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Material and unconscious forces do not afford a sufficient
cause for man's reason, conscience, and free will. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Man, as an effect,
can be referred only to a cause possessing self-consciousness and a moral
nature, in other words, personality.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This argument is is part an application to man of the principles of both the Cosmological
and the Teleological Arguments. Flint, Theism, 74&mdash;<q>Although causality
does not involve design, nor design goodness, yet design involves causality, and goodness
both causality and design.</q> Jacobi: <q>Nature conceals God; man reveals him.</q>
</p>

<p>
Man is an effect. The history of the geologic ages proves that man has not always
existed, and even if the lower creatures were his progenitors, his intellect and freedom
are not eternal <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a parte ante</foreign>. We consider man, not as a physical, but as a spiritual,
being. Thompson, Christian Theism, 75&mdash;<q>Every true cause must be sufficient to
account for the effect.</q> Locke, Essay, book 4, chap. 10&mdash;<q>Cogitable existence cannot
be produced out of incogitable.</q> Martineau, Study of Religion, 1:258 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Even if man had always existed, however, we should not need to abandon the
argument. We might start, not from beginning of existence, but from beginning of
phenomena. I might see God in the world, just as I see thought, feeling, will, in
my fellow men. Fullerton, Plain Argument for God: I do not infer you, as cause of
the <emph>existence</emph> of your body: I recognize you as present and <emph>working</emph> through your body.
Its changes of gesture and speech reveal a personality behind them. So I do not
need to argue back to a Being who once <emph>caused</emph> nature and history; I recognize a
<emph>present</emph> Being, exercising wisdom and power, by signs such as reveal personality in
man. Nature is itself the Watchmaker manifesting himself in the very process of
making the watch. This is the meaning of the noble Epilogue to Robert Browning's
Dramatis Personæ, 252&mdash;<q>That one Face, far from vanish, rather grows, Or decomposes
but to recompose, Become my universe that feels and knows.</q> <q>That Face,</q> said
Mr. Browning to Mrs. Orr, <q>That Face is the face of Christ; that is how I feel him.</q>
Nature is an expression of the mind and will of Christ, as my face is an expression
of my mind and will. But in both cases, behind and above the face is a personality, of
which the face is but the partial and temporary expression.
</p>

<p>
Bowne, Philos. Theism, 104, 107&mdash;<q>My fellow beings act <emph>as if</emph> they had thought,
feeling, and will. So nature looks <emph>as if</emph> thought, feeling, and will were behind it. If
we deny mind in nature, we must deny mind in man. If there be no controlling
mind in nature, moreover, there can be none in man, for if the basal power is blind
and necessary, then all that depends upon it is necessitated also.</q> LeConte, in Royce's
Conception of God, 44&mdash;<q>There is only one place in the world where we can get behind
physical phenomena, behind the veil of matter, namely, in our own brain, and we
find there a self, a person. Is it not reasonable that, if we could get behind the veil
of nature, we should find the same, that is, a Person? But if so, we must conclude,
an infinite Person, and therefore the only complete Personality that exists. Perfect
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
personality is not only self-conscious, but self-existent. <emph>They</emph> are only imperfect
images, and, as it were, separated fragments, of the infinite Personality of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
Personality = self-consciousness + self-determination in view of moral ends. The
brute has intelligence and will, but has neither self-consciousness, conscience, nor
free-will. See Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 1:76 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Diman, Theistic Argument,
91, 251&mdash;<q>Suppose <q>the intuitions of the moral faculty are the slowly organized results
of experience received from the race</q>; still, having found that the universe affords
evidence of a supremely intelligent cause, we may believe that man's moral nature
affords the highest illustration of its mode of working</q>; 358&mdash;<q>Shall we explain the
lower forms of will by the higher, or the higher by the lower?</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. Man's moral nature proves the existence of a holy Lawgiver and
Judge. The elements of the proof are:&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Conscience recognizes the
existence of a moral law which has supreme authority. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Known violations
of this moral law are followed by feelings of ill-desert and fears of
judgment. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) This moral law, since it is not self-imposed, and these
threats of judgment, since they are not self-executing, respectively argue
the existence of a holy will that has imposed the law, and of a punitive
power that will execute the threats of the moral nature.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See Bishop Butler's Sermons on Human Nature, in Works, Bohn's ed., 385-414. Butler's
great discovery was that of the supremacy of conscience in the moral constitution
of man: <q>Had it strength as it has right, had it power as it has manifest authority, it
would absolutely govern the world.</q> Conscience = the moral judiciary of the soul&mdash;not
law, nor sheriff, but judge; see under Anthropology. Diman, Theistic Argument,
251&mdash;<q>Conscience does not lay down a law; it warns us of the existence of a law; and
not only of a law, but of a purpose&mdash;not our own, but the purpose of another, which
it is our mission to realize.</q> See Murphy, Scientific Bases of Faith, 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> It proves
personality in the Lawgiver, because its utterances are not abstract, like those of
reason, but are in the nature of command; they are not in the indicative, but in the
imperative, mood; it says, <q>thou shalt</q> and <q>thou shalt not.</q> This argues <emph>will</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Hutton, Essays, 1:11&mdash;<q>Conscience is an ideal Moses, and thunders from an invisible
Sinai</q>; <q>the Atheist regards conscience not as a skylight, opened to let in upon human
nature an infinite dawn from above, but as a polished arch or dome, completing and
reflecting the whole edifice beneath.</q> But conscience cannot be the mere reflection
and expression of nature, for it represses and condemns nature. Tulloch, Theism:
<q>Conscience, like the magnetic needle, indicates the existence of an unknown Power
which from afar controls its vibrations and at whose presence it trembles.</q> Nero
spends nights of terror in wandering through the halls of his Golden House. Kant
holds that faith in duty requires faith in a God who will defend and reward duty&mdash;see
Critique of Pure Reason, 359-387. See also Porter, Human Intellect, 524.
</p>

<p>
Kant, in his Metaphysic of Ethics, represents the action of conscience as like <q>conducting
a case before a court,</q> and he adds: <q>Now that he who is accused before his
conscience should be figured to be just the same person as his judge, is an absurd representation
of a tribunal; since, in such an event, the accuser would always lose his
suit. Conscience must therefore represent to itself always some other than itself as
Judge, unless it is to arrive at a contradiction with itself.</q> See also his Critique of the
Practical Reason, Werke, 8:214&mdash;<q>Duty, thou sublime and mighty name, that hast in
thee nothing to attract or win, but challengest submission; and yet dost threaten
nothing to sway the will by that which may arouse natural terror or aversion, but
merely holdest forth a Law; a Law which of itself finds entrance into the mind, and
even while we disobey, against our will compels our reverence, a Law in presence of
which all inclinations grow dumb, even while they secretly rebel; what origin is there
worthy of thee? Where can we find the root of thy noble descent, which proudly
rejects all kinship with the inclinations?</q> Archbishop Temple answers, in his Bampton
Lectures, 58, 59, <q>This eternal Law is the Eternal himself, the almighty God.</q>
Robert Browning: <q>The sense within me that I owe a debt Assures me&mdash;Somewhere
must be Somebody, Ready to take his due. All comes to this: Where due is, there
acceptance follows: find Him who accepts the due.</q>
</p>

<p>
Salter, Ethical Religion, quoted in Pfleiderer's article on Religionless Morality, Am.
Jour. Theol., 3:237&mdash;<q>The earth and the stars do not create the law of gravitation
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
which they obey; no more does man, or the united hosts of rational beings in the universe,
create the law of duty.</q> The will expressed in the moral imperative is <emph>superior</emph>
to ours, for otherwise it would issue no commands. Yet it is <emph>one</emph> with ours as the life
of an organism is one with the life of its members. Theonomy is not heteronomy
but the highest autonomy, the guarantee of our personal freedom against all servitude
of man. Seneca: <q>Deo parere libertas est.</q> Knight, Essays in Philosophy, 272&mdash;<q>In
conscience we see an <q>alter ego</q>, in us yet not of us, another Personality behind our
own.</q> Martineau, Types, 2:105&mdash;<q>Over a person only a person can have authority....
A solitary being, with no other sentient nature in the universe, would feel no
duty</q>; Study, 1:26&mdash;<q>As Perception gives us Will in the shape of <emph>Causality</emph> over
against us in the Non-Ego, so Conscience gives us Will in the shape of <emph>Authority</emph> over
against us in the Non-Ego.... 2:7&mdash;We cannot deduce the phenomena of character
from an agent who has none.</q> Hutton, Essays, 1:41, 42&mdash;<q>When we disobey conscience,
the Power which has therein ceased to <emph>move</emph> us has retired only to <emph>observe</emph>&mdash;to
keep <emph>watch</emph> over us as we mould ourselves.</q> Cardinal Newman, Apologia, 377&mdash;<q>Were
it not for the voice speaking so clearly in my conscience and my heart, I should be an
atheist, or a pantheist, or a polytheist, when I looked into the world.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
3. Man's emotional and voluntary nature proves the existence of a
Being who can furnish in himself a satisfying object of human affection
and an end which will call forth man's highest activities and ensure his
highest progress.
</p>

<p>
Only a Being of power, wisdom, holiness, and goodness, and all these
indefinitely greater than any that we know upon the earth, can meet this
demand of the human soul. Such a Being must exist. Otherwise man's
greatest need would be unsupplied, and belief in a lie be more productive
of virtue than belief in the truth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Feuerbach calls God <q>the Brocken-shadow of man himself</q>; <q>consciousness of God
= self-consciousness</q>; <q>religion is a dream of the human soul</q>; <q>all theology is
anthropology</q>; <q>man made God in his own image.</q> But conscience shows that man
does not recognize in God simply his like, but also his opposite. Not as Galton: <q>Piety
= conscience + instability.</q> The finest minds are of the leaning type; see Murphy,
Scientific Bases, 370; Augustine, Confessions, 1:1&mdash;<q>Thou hast made us for thyself,
and our heart is restless till it finds rest in thee.</q> On John Stuart Mill&mdash;<q>a mind that
could not find God, and a heart that could not do without him</q>&mdash;see his Autobiography,
and Browne, in Strivings for the Faith (Christ. Ev. Socy.), 259-287. Comte, in his
later days, constructed an object of worship in Universal Humanity, and invented a
ritual which Huxley calls <q>Catholicism <emph>minus</emph> Christianity.</q> See also Tyndall, Belfast
Address: <q>Did I not believe, said a great man to me once, that an Intelligence exists
at the heart of things, my life on earth would be intolerable.</q> Martineau, Types of
Ethical Theory, 1:505,506.
</p>

<p>
The last line of Schiller's Pilgrim reads: <q>Und das Dort ist niemals hier.</q> The
finite never satisfies. Tennyson, Two Voices: <q>'Tis life, whereof our nerves are scant,
Oh life, not death, for which we pant; More life, and fuller, that I want.</q> Seth,
Ethical Principles, 419&mdash;<q>A moral universe, an absolute moral Being, is the indispensable
environment of the ethical life, without which it cannot attain to its perfect
growth.... There is a moral <emph>God</emph>, or this is no <emph>universe</emph>.</q> James, Will to Believe, 116&mdash;<q>A
God is the most adequate possible object for minds framed like our own to conceive
as lying at the root of the universe. Anything short of God is not a rational
object, anything more than God is not possible, if man needs an object of knowledge,
feeling, and will.</q>
</p>

<p>
Romanes, Thoughts on Religion, 41&mdash;<q>To speak of the Religion of the Unknowable,
the Religion of Cosmism, the Religion of Humanity, where the personality of the
First Cause is not recognized, is as unmeaning as it would be to speak of the love of a
triangle or the rationality of the equator.</q> It was said of Comte's system that, <q>the
wine of the real presence being poured out, we are asked to adore the empty cup.</q>
<q>We want an object of devotion, and Comte presents us with a looking-glass</q>
(Martineau). Huxley said he would as soon adore a wilderness of apes as the Positivist's
rationalized conception of humanity. It is only the ideal in humanity, the divine
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
element in humanity that can be worshiped. And when we once conceive of this, we
cannot be satisfied until we find it somewhere realized, as in Jesus Christ.
</p>

<p>
Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 265-272&mdash;Huxley believes that Evolution is <q>a materialized
logical process</q>; that nothing endures save the flow of energy and <q>the rational
order which pervades it.</q> In the earlier part of this process, <emph>nature</emph>, there is no morality
or benevolence. But the process ends by producing <emph>man</emph>, who can make progress
only by waging moral war against the natural forces which impel him. He must be
benevolent and just. Shall we not say, in spite of Mr. Huxley, that this shows what
the nature of the system is, and that there must be a benevolent and just Being who
ordained it? Martineau, Seat of Authority, 63-68&mdash;<q>Though the authority of the
higher incentive is self-known, it cannot be self-created; for while it is in me, it is
above me.... This authority to which conscience introduces me, though emerging
in consciousness, is yet <emph>objective</emph> to us all, and is necessarily referred to the nature of
things, irrespective of the accidents of our mental constitution. It is not dependent
on us, but independent. All minds born into the universe are ushered into the presence
of a real righteousness, as surely as into a scene of actual space. Perception
reveals <emph>another</emph> than ourselves; conscience reveals <emph>a higher</emph> than ourselves.</q>
</p>

<p>
We must freely grant, however, that this argument from man's aspirations has
weight only upon the supposition that a wise, truthful, holy, and benevolent God
exists, who has so constituted our minds that their thinking and their affections correspond
to truth and to himself. An evil being might have so constituted us that all
logic would lead us into error. The argument is therefore the development and
expression of our intuitive idea of God. Luthardt, Fundamental Truths: <q>Nature is
like a written document containing only consonants. It is we who must furnish the
vowels that shall decipher it. Unless we bring with us the idea of God, we shall find
nature but dumb.</q> See also Pfleiderer, Die Religion, 1:174.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
A. <hi rend='italic'>The defects of the Anthropological Argument are</hi>: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It cannot
prove a creator of the material universe. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It cannot prove the infinity
of God, since man from whom we argue is finite. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It cannot prove the
mercy of God. But,
</p>

<p>
B. <hi rend='italic'>The value of the Argument</hi> is, that it assures us of the existence of
a personal Being, who rules us in righteousness, and who is the proper
object of supreme affection and service. But whether this Being is the
original creator of all things, or merely the author of our own existence,
whether he is infinite or finite, whether he is a Being of simple righteousness
or also of mercy, this argument cannot assure us.
</p>

<p>
Among the arguments for the existence of God, however, we assign to
this the chief place, since it adds to the ideas of causative power (which
we derived from the Cosmological Argument) and of contriving intelligence
(which we derived from the Teleological Argument), the far wider
ideas of personality and righteous lordship.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Sir Wm. Hamilton, Works of Reid, 2:974, note U; Lect. on Metaph., 1:33&mdash;<q>The
only valid arguments for the existence of God and for the immortality of the soul rest
upon the ground of man's moral nature</q>; <q>theology is wholly dependent upon psychology,
for with the proof of the moral nature of man stands or falls the proof of the
existence of a Deity.</q> But Diman, Theistic Argument, 244, very properly objects to
making this argument from the nature of man the sole proof of Deity: <q>It should be
rather used to show the attributes of the Being whose existence has been already
proved from other sources</q>; <q>hence the Anthropological Argument is as dependent
upon the Cosmological and Teleological Arguments as they are upon it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Yet the Anthropological Argument is needed to supplement the conclusions of the
two others. Those who, like Herbert Spencer, recognize an infinite and absolute
Being, Power and Cause, may yet fail to recognize this being as spiritual and personal,
simply because they do not recognize themselves as spiritual and personal
beings, that is, do not recognize reason, conscience and free-will in man. Agnosticism
in philosophy involves agnosticism in religion. R. K. Eccles: <q>All the most advanced
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
languages capitalize the word <q>God,</q> and the word <q>I.</q></q> See Flint, Theism, 68; Mill,
Criticism of Hamilton, 2:266; Dove, Logic of Christian Faith, 211-236, 261-299; Martineau,
Types, Introd., 3; Cooke, Religion and Chemistry: <q>God is love; but nature
could not prove it, and the Lamb was slain from the foundation of the world in order
to attest it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Everything in philosophy depends on where we begin, whether with nature or with
self, whether with the necessary or with the free. In one sense, therefore, we should
in practice begin with the Anthropological Argument, and then use the Cosmological
and Teleological Arguments as warranting the application to nature of the conclusions
which we have drawn from man. As God stands over against man in Conscience,
and says to him: <q>Thou</q>; so man stands over against God in Nature, and may say to
him: <q>Thou.</q> Mulford, Republic of God, 28&mdash;<q>As the personality of man has its
foundation in the personality of God, so the realization by man of his own personality
always brings man nearer to God.</q> Robert Browning: <q>Quoth a young Sadducee:
<q>Reader of many rolls, Is it so certain we Have, as they tell us, souls?</q> <q>Son, there is
no reply!</q> The Rabbi bit his beard: <q>Certain, a soul have <emph>I</emph>&mdash;<emph>We</emph> may have none,</q> he
sneered. Thus Karshook, the Hiram's Hammer, The Right-hand Temple-column,
Taught babes in grace their grammar, And struck the simple, solemn.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is very common at this place to treat of what are called the Historical and the
Biblical Arguments for the existence of God&mdash;the former arguing, from the unity of
history, the latter arguing, from the unity of the Bible, that this unity must in each
case have for its cause and explanation the existence of God. It is a sufficient reason
for not discussing these arguments, that, without a previous belief in the existence of
God, no one will see unity either in history or in the Bible. Turner, the painter,
exhibited a picture which seemed all mist and cloud until he put a dab of scarlet into
it. That gave the true point of view, and all the rest became intelligible. So Christ's
coming and Christ's blood make intelligible both the Scriptures and human history.
He carries in his girdle the key to all mysteries. Schopenhauer, knowing no Christ,
admitted no philosophy of history. He regarded history as the mere fortuitous play
of individual caprice. Pascal: <q>Jesus Christ is the centre of everything, and the
object of everything, and he that does not know him knows nothing of nature, and
nothing of himself.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. The Ontological Argument, or Argument from our Abstract
and Necessary Ideas.</head>

<p>
This argument infers the existence of God from the abstract and necessary
ideas of the human mind. It has three forms:
</p>

<p>
1. That of Samuel Clarke. Space and time are attributes of substance
or being. But space and time are respectively infinite and eternal. There
must therefore be an infinite and eternal substance or Being to whom these
attributes belong.
</p>

<p>
Gillespie states the argument somewhat differently. Space and time are
modes of existence. But space and time are respectively infinite and eternal.
There must therefore be an infinite and eternal Being who subsists
in these modes. But we reply:
</p>

<p>
Space and time are neither attributes of substance nor modes of existence.
The argument, if valid, would prove that God is not mind but matter,
for that could not be mind, but only matter, of which space and time were
either attributes or modes.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Ontological Argument is frequently called the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> argument, that is, the
argument from that which is logically prior, or earlier than experience, viz., our intuitive
ideas. All the forms of the Ontological Argument are in this sense <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign>. Space
and time are <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> ideas. See Samuel Clarke, Works, 2:521; Gillespie, Necessary
Existence of God. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Per contra</foreign>, see Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, 364: Calderwood,
Moral Philosophy, 226&mdash;<q>To begin, as Clarke did, with the proposition that <q>something
has existed from eternity,</q> is virtually to propose an argument after having assumed
what is to be proved. Gillespie's form of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> argument, starting with the proposition
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
<q>infinity of extension is necessarily existing,</q> is liable to the same objection,
with the additional disadvantage of attributing a property of matter to the Deity.</q>
</p>

<p>
H. B. Smith says that Brougham misrepresented Clarke: <q>Clarke's argument is in his
sixth proposition, and supposes the existence proved in what goes before. He aims here
to establish the infinitude and omnipresence of this First Being. He does not prove
<emph>existence</emph> from immensity.</q> But we reply, neither can he prove the <emph>infinity</emph> of God
from the immensity of space. Space and time are neither substances nor attributes, but
are rather relations; see Calderwood, Philos. of Infinite, 331-335; Cocker, Theistic Conception
of the World, 66-96. The doctrine that space and time are attributes or modes
of God's existence tends to materialistic pantheism like that of Spinoza, who held that
<q>the one and simple substance</q> (substantia una et unica) is known to us through the
two attributes of thought and extension; mind = God in the mode of thought; matter
= God in the mode of extension. Dove, Logic of the Christian Faith, 127, says well that
an extended God is a material God; <q>space and time are attributes neither of matter
nor mind</q>; <q>we must carry the moral idea into the natural world, not the natural
idea into the moral world.</q> See also, Blunt, Dictionary Doct. and Hist. Theol., 740;
Porter, Human Intellect, 567. H. M. Stanley, on Space and Science, in Philos. Rev., Nov.
1898:615&mdash;<q>Space is not full of things, but things are spaceful.... Space is a form
of dynamic appearance.</q> Prof. C. A. Strong: <q>The world composed of consciousness
and other existences is not in space, though it may be in something of which space is
the symbol.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. That of Descartes. We have the idea of an infinite and perfect
Being. This idea cannot be derived from imperfect and finite things.
There must therefore be an infinite and perfect Being who is its cause.
</p>

<p>
But we reply that this argument confounds the idea of the infinite with
an infinite idea. Man's idea of the infinite is not infinite but finite, and
from a finite effect we cannot argue an infinite cause.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This form of the Ontological Argument, while it is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign>, as based upon a necessary
idea of the human mind, is, unlike the other forms of the same argument, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a posteriori</foreign>,
as arguing from this idea, as an <emph>effect</emph>, to the existence of a Being who is its <emph>cause</emph>. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>A
posteriori</foreign> argument = from that which is later to that which is earlier, that is, from
effect to cause. The Cosmological, Teleological, and Anthropological Arguments are
arguments <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a posteriori</foreign>. Of this sort is the argument of Descartes; see Descartes, Meditation
3: <q>Hæc idea quæ in nobis est requirit Deum pro causa; Deusque proinde
existit.</q> The idea in men's minds is the impression of the workman's name stamped
indelibly on his work&mdash;the shadow cast upon the human soul by that unseen One of
whose being and presence it dimly informs us. Blunt, Dict. of Theol., 739; Saisset, Pantheism,
1:54&mdash;<q>Descartes sets out from a fact of consciousness, while Anselm sets out
from an abstract conception</q>; <q>Descartes's argument might be considered a branch of
the Anthropological or Moral Argument, but for the fact that this last proceeds from
man's constitution rather than from his abstract ideas.</q> See Bib. Sac., 1849:637.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
3. That of Anselm. We have the idea of an absolutely perfect Being.
But existence is an attribute of perfection. An absolutely perfect Being
must therefore exist.
</p>

<p>
But we reply that this argument confounds ideal existence with real
existence. Our ideas are not the measure of external reality.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Anselm, Proslogion, 2&mdash;<q>Id, quo majus cogitari nequit, non potest esse in intellectu
solo.</q> See translation of the Proslogion, in Bib. Sac., 1851:529, 699; Kant, Critique, 368.
The arguments of Descartes and Anselm, with Kant's reply, are given in their original
form by Harris, in Journ. Spec. Philos., 15:420-428. The major premise here is not that
all perfect ideas imply the existence of the object which they represent, for then, as
Kant objects, I might argue from my perfect idea of a $100 bill that I actually possessed
the same, which would be far from the fact. So I have a perfect idea of a perfectly
evil being, of a centaur, of nothing,&mdash;but it does not follow that the evil being,
that the centaur, that nothing, exists. The argument is rather from the idea of absolute
and perfect Being&mdash;of <q>that, no greater than which can be conceived.</q> There can be
but one such being, and there can be but one such idea.
</p>

<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>

<p>
Yet, even thus understood, we cannot argue from the idea to the actual existence of
such a being. Case, Physical Realism, 173&mdash;<q>God is not an idea, and consequently cannot
be inferred from mere ideas.</q> Bowne, Philos. Theism, 43&mdash;The Ontological Argument
<q>only points out that the idea of the perfect must include the idea of existence;
but there is nothing to show that the self-consistent idea represents an objective reality.</q>
I can imagine the Sea-serpent, the Jinn of the Thousand and One Nights, <q>The
Anthropophagi, and men whose heads Do grow beneath their shoulders.</q> The winged
horse of Uhland possessed every possible virtue, and only one fault,&mdash;it was dead.
If every perfect idea implied the reality of its object, there might be horses with
ten legs, and trees with roots in the air.
</p>

<p>
<q>Anselm's argument implies,</q> says Fisher, in Journ. Christ. Philos., Jan. 1883:114,
<q>that existence <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in re</foreign> is a constituent of the concept. It would conclude the existence
of a being from the definition of a word. This inference is justified only on the basis of
philosophical realism.</q> Dove, Logic of the Christ. Faith, 141&mdash;<q>The Ontological
Argument is the algebraic formula of the universe, which leads to a valid conclusion
with regard to real existence, only when we fill it in with objects with which we become
acquainted in the arguments <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a posteriori</foreign>.</q> See also Shedd, Hist. Doct., 1:331, Dogm.
Theol., 1:221-241, and in Presb. Rev., April, 1884:212-227 (favoring the argument);
Fisher, Essays, 574; Thompson, Christian Theism, 171; H. B. Smith, Introd. to Christ.
Theol., 122; Pfleiderer, Die Religion, 1:181-187; Studien und Kritiken, 1875:611-655.
</p>

<p>
Dorner, in his Glaubenslehre, 1:197, gives us the best statement of the Ontological
Argument: <q>Reason thinks of God as existing. Reason would not be reason, if it did
not think of God as existing. Reason only is, upon the assumption that God is.</q> But
this is evidently not argument, but only vivid statement of the necessary assumption
of the existence of an absolute Reason which conditions and gives validity to ours.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Although this last must be considered the most perfect form of the Ontological
Argument, it is evident that it conducts us only to an ideal conclusion,
not to real existence. In common with the two preceding forms
of the argument, moreover, it tacitly assumes, as already existing in the
human mind, that very knowledge of God's existence which it would derive
from logical demonstration. It has value, therefore, simply as showing
what God must be, if he exists at all.
</p>

<p>
But the existence of a Being indefinitely great, a personal Cause, Contriver
and Lawgiver, has been proved by the preceding arguments; for the
law of parsimony requires us to apply the conclusions of the first three
arguments to one Being, and not to many. To this one Being we may
now ascribe the infinity and perfection, the idea of which lies at the basis
of the Ontological Argument&mdash;ascribe them, not because they are demonstrably
his, but because our mental constitution will not allow us to think
otherwise. Thus clothing him with all perfections which the human mind
can conceive, and these in illimitable fullness, we have one whom we may
justly call God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
McCosh, Div. Govt., 12, note&mdash;<q>It is at this place, if we do not mistake, that the idea
of the Infinite comes in. The capacity of the human mind to form such an idea, or
rather its intuitive belief in an Infinite of which it feels that it cannot form an adequate
conception, may be no proof (as Kant maintains) of the existence of an infinite Being;
but it is, we are convinced, the means by which the mind is enabled to invest the Deity,
shown on other grounds to exist, with the attributes of infinity, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, to look on his
being, power, goodness, and all his perfections, as infinite.</q> Even Flint, Theism, 68,
who holds that we reach the existence of God by inference, speaks of <q>necessary conditions
of thought and feeling, and ineradicable aspirations, which force on us ideas of
absolute existence, infinity, and perfection, and will neither permit us to deny these
perfections to God, nor to ascribe them to any other being.</q> Belief in God is not the
conclusion of a demonstration, but the solution of a problem. Calderwood, Moral
Philosophy, 226&mdash;<q>Either the whole question is assumed in starting, or the Infinite is
not reached in concluding.</q>
</p>

<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>

<p>
Clarke, Christian Theology, 97-114, divides his proof into two parts: I. Evidence of
the existence of God from the intellectual starting-point: The discovery of <emph>Mind</emph> in
the universe is made, 1. through the intelligibleness of the universe to us; 2. through
the idea of cause; 3. through the presence of ends in the universe. II. Evidence of
the existence of God from the religious starting-point: The discovery of the <emph>good God</emph> is
made, 1. through the religious nature of man; 2. through the great dilemma&mdash;God
the best, or the worst; 3. through the spiritual experience of men, especially in Christianity.
So far as Dr. Clarke's proof is intended to be a statement, not of a primitive belief,
but of a logical process, we must hold it to be equally defective with the three forms
of proof which we have seen to furnish some corroborative evidence of God's existence.
Dr. Clarke therefore does well to add: <q>Religion was not produced by proof
of God's existence, and will not be destroyed by its insufficiency to some minds. Religion
existed before argument; in fact, it is the preciousness of religion that leads to the
seeking for all possible confirmations of the reality of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
The three forms of proof already mentioned&mdash;the Cosmological, the Teleological, and
the Anthropological Arguments&mdash;may be likened to the three arches of a bridge over
a wide and rushing river. The bridge has only two defects, but these defects are very
serious. The first is that one cannot get on to the bridge; the end toward the hither
bank is wholly lacking; the bridge of logical argument cannot be entered upon except
by assuming the validity of logical processes; this assumption takes for granted at the
outset the existence of a God who has made our faculties to act correctly; we get on
to the bridge, not by logical process, but only by a leap of intuition, and by assuming
at the beginning the very thing which we set out to prove. The second defect of the
so-called bridge of argument is that when one has once gotten on, he can never get off.
The connection with the further bank is also lacking. All the premises from which
we argue being finite, we are warranted in drawing only a finite conclusion. Argument
cannot reach the Infinite, and only an infinite Being is worthy to be called God.
We can get off from our logical bridge, not by logical process, but only by another and
final leap of intuition, and by once more assuming the existence of the infinite Being
whom we had so vainly sought to reach by mere argument. The process seems to be
referred to in <emph>Job 11:7&mdash;<q>Canst thou by searching find out God? Canst thou find out the Almighty unto
perfection?</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
As a logical process this is indeed defective, since all logic as well as all
observation depends for its validity upon the presupposed existence of
God, and since this particular process, even granting the validity of logic
in general, does not warrant the conclusion that God exists, except upon a
second assumption that our abstract ideas of infinity and perfection are to
be applied to the Being to whom argument has actually conducted us.
</p>

<p>
But although both ends of the logical bridge are confessedly wanting, the
process may serve and does serve a more useful purpose than that of mere
demonstration, namely, that of awakening, explicating, and confirming a
conviction which, though the most fundamental of all, may yet have been
partially slumbering for lack of thought.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Morell, Philos. Fragments, 177, 179&mdash;<q>We can, in fact, no more prove the existence of
a God by a logical argument, than we can prove the existence of an external world; but
none the less may we obtain as strong a <emph>practical</emph> conviction of the one, as the other.</q>
<q>We arrive at a scientific belief in the existence of God just as we do at any other possible
human truth. We <emph>assume</emph> it, as a hypothesis absolutely necessary to account for
the phenomena of the universe; and then evidences from every quarter begin to converge
upon it, until, in process of time, the common sense of mankind, cultivated and
enlightened by ever accumulating knowledge, pronounces upon the validity of the
hypothesis with a voice scarcely less decided and universal than it does in the case of
our highest scientific convictions.</q>
</p>

<p>
Fisher, Supernat. Origin of Christianity, 572&mdash;<q>What then is the purport and force
of the several arguments for the existence of God? We reply that these proofs are
the different modes in which faith expresses itself and seeks confirmation. In them
faith, or the object of faith, is more exactly conceived and defined, and in them is found
a corroboration, not arbitrary but substantial and valuable, of that faith which springs
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
from the soul itself. Such proofs, therefore, are neither on the one hand sufficient to
create and sustain faith, nor are they on the other hand to be set aside as of no value.</q>
A. J. Barrett: <q>The arguments are not so much a bridge in themselves, as they are
guys, to hold firm the great suspension-bridge of intuition, by which we pass the gulf
from man to God. Or, while they are not a ladder by which we may reach heaven,
they are the Ossa on Pelion, from whose combined height we may descry heaven.</q>
</p>

<p>
Anselm: <q>Negligentia mihi videtur, si postquam confirmati sumus in fide non studemus
quod credimus intelligere.</q> Bradley, Appearance and Reality: <q>Metaphysics
is the finding of bad reasons for what we believe upon instinct; but to find these reasons
is no less an instinct.</q> Illingworth, Div. and Hum. Personality, lect. III&mdash;<q>Belief
in a personal God is an instinctive judgment, progressively justified by reason.</q>
Knight, Essays in Philosophy, 241&mdash;The arguments are <q>historical memorials of the
efforts of the human race to vindicate to itself the existence of a reality of which it is
conscious, but which it cannot perfectly define.</q> H. Fielding, The Hearts of Men, 313&mdash;<q>Creeds
are the grammar of religion. They are to religion what grammar is to
speech. Words are the expression of our wants; grammar is the theory formed afterwards.
Speech never proceeded from grammar, but the reverse. As speech progresses
and changes from unknown causes, grammar must follow.</q> Pascal: <q>The
heart has reasons of its own which the reason does not know.</q> Frances Power Cobbe:
<q>Intuitions are God's tuitions.</q> On the whole subject, see Cudworth, Intel. System,
3:42; Calderwood, Philos. of Infinite, 150 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Curtis, Human Element in Inspiration,
242; Peabody, in Andover Rev., July, 1884; Hahn, History of Arguments for Existence
of God; Lotze, Philos. of Religion, 8-34; Am. Jour. Theol., Jan. 1906:53-71.
</p>

<p>
Hegel, in his Logic, page 3, speaking of the disposition to regard the proofs of God's
existence as the only means of producing faith in God, says: <q>Such a doctrine would
find its parallel, if we said that eating was impossible before we had acquired a knowledge
of the chemical, botanical and zoölogical qualities of our food; and that we must
delay digestion till we had finished the study of anatomy and physiology.</q> It is a
mistake to suppose that there can be no religious <emph>life</emph> without a correct <emph>theory</emph> of life.
Must I refuse to drink water or to breathe air, until I can manufacture both for myself?
Some things are given to us. Among these things are <emph><q>grace and truth</q> (John 1:17; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> 9)</emph>.
But there are ever those who are willing to take nothing as a free gift, and who insist
on working out all knowledge, as well as all salvation, by processes of their own.
Pelagianism, with its denial of the doctrines of grace, is but the further development
of a rationalism which refuses to accept primitive truths unless these can be logically
demonstrated. Since the existence of the soul, of the world, and of God cannot be
proved in this way, rationalism is led to curtail, or to misinterpret, the deliverances of
consciousness, and hence result certain systems now to be mentioned.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Erroneous Explanations, And Conclusion.</head>

<p>
Any correct explanation of the universe must postulate an intuitive
knowledge of the existence of the external world, of self, and of God.
The desire for scientific unity, however, has occasioned attempts to reduce
these three factors to one, and according as one or another of the three has
been regarded as the all-inclusive principle, the result has been Materialism,
Materialistic Idealism, or Idealistic Pantheism. This scientific impulse is
better satisfied by a system which we may designate as Ethical Monism.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We may summarize the present chapter as follows: 1. <hi rend='italic'>Materialism</hi>: Universe =
Atoms. Reply: Atoms can do nothing without force, and can be nothing (intelligible)
without ideas. 2. <hi rend='italic'>Materialistic Idealism</hi>: Universe = Force + Ideas. Reply: Ideas
belong to Mind, and Force can be exerted only by Will. 3. <hi rend='italic'>Idealistic Pantheism</hi>:
Universe = Immanent and Impersonal Mind and Will. Reply: Spirit in man shows
that the Infinite Spirit must be Transcendent and Personal Mind and Will. We are led
from these three forms of error to a conclusion which we may denominate 4. <hi rend='italic'>Ethical
Monism</hi>: Universe = Finite, partial, graded manifestation of the divine Life; Matter
being God's self-limitation under the law of necessity, Humanity being God's self-limitation
under the law of freedom, Incarnation and Atonement being God's self-limitations
under the law of grace. Metaphysical Monism, or the doctrine of one Substance,
Principle, or Ground of Being, is consistent with Psychological Dualism, or the doctrine
that the soul is personally distinct from matter on the one hand and from God on
the other.
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Materialism.</head>

<p>
Materialism is that method of thought which gives priority to matter,
rather than to mind, in its explanations of the universe. Upon this view,
material atoms constitute the ultimate and fundamental reality of which
all things, rational and irrational, are but combinations and phenomena.
Force is regarded as a universal and inseparable property of matter.
</p>

<p>
The element of truth in materialism is the reality of the external world.
Its error is in regarding the external world as having original and independent
existence, and in regarding mind as its product.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Materialism regards atoms as the bricks of which the material universe, the house
we inhabit, is built. Sir William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) estimates that, if a drop of
water were magnified to the size of our earth, the atoms of which it consists would
certainly appear larger than boy's marbles, and yet would be smaller than billiard balls.
Of these atoms, all things, visible and invisible, are made. Mind, with all its activities,
is a combination or phenomenon of atoms. <q>Man ist was er iszt: ohne Phosphor kein
Gedanke</q>&mdash;<q>One <emph>is</emph> what he <emph>eats</emph>: without phosphorus, no thought.</q> Ethics is a bill
of fare; and worship, like heat, is a mode of motion. Agassiz, however, wittily asked:
<q>Are fishermen, then, more intelligent than farmers, because they eat so much fish,
and therefore take in more phosphorus?</q>
</p>

<p>
It is evident that much is here attributed to atoms which really belongs to force.
Deprive atoms of force, and all that remains is extension, which = space = zero.
Moreover, <q>if atoms <emph>are</emph> extended, they cannot be ultimate, for extension implies
divisibility, and that which is conceivably divisible cannot be a philosophical ultimate.
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
But, if atoms <emph>are not</emph> extended, then even an infinite multiplication and combination of
them could not produce an extended substance. Furthermore, an atom that is neither
extended substance nor thinking substance is inconceivable. The real ultimate is
force, and this force cannot be exerted by nothing, but, as we shall hereafter see, can
be exerted only by a personal Spirit, for this alone possesses the characteristics of reality,
namely, definiteness, unity, and activity.</q>
</p>

<p>
Not only force but also intelligence must be attributed to atoms, before they can
explain any operation of nature. Herschel says not only that <q>the force of gravitation
seems like that of a universal will,</q> but that the atoms themselves, in recognizing
each other in order to combine, show a great deal of <q>presence of mind.</q> Ladd,
Introd. to Philosophy, 269&mdash;<q>A distinguished astronomer has said that every body in
the solar system is behaving as if it knew precisely how it ought to behave in consistency
with its own nature, and with the behavior of every other body in the same system....
Each atom has danced countless millions of miles, with countless millions
of different partners, many of which required an important modification of its mode of
motion, without ever departing from the correct step or the right time.</q> J. P. Cooke,
Credentials of Science, 104, 177, suggests that something more than atoms is needed to
explain the universe. A correlating Intelligence and Will must be assumed. Atoms
by themselves would be like a heap of loose nails which need to be magnetized if they
are to hold together. All structures would be resolved, and all forms of matter would
disappear, if the Presence which sustains them were withdrawn. The atom, like the
monad of Leibnitz, is <q>parvus in suo genere deus</q>&mdash;<q>a little god in its nature</q>&mdash;only
because it is the expression of the mind and will of an immanent God.
</p>

<p>
Plato speaks of men who are <q>dazzled by too near a look at material things.</q> They
do not perceive that these very material things, since they can be interpreted only in
terms of spirit, must themselves be essentially spiritual. Materialism is the explanation
of a world of which we know something&mdash;the world of mind&mdash;by a world of which we
know next to nothing&mdash;the world of matter. Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 297, 298&mdash;<q>How
about your material atoms and brain-molecules? They have no real existence
save as objects of thought, and therefore the very thought, which you say your atoms
produce, turns out to be the essential precondition of their own existence.</q> With this
agree the words of Dr. Ladd: <q>Knowledge of matter involves repeated activities of
sensation and reflection, of inductive and deductive inference, of intuitional belief in
substance. These are all activities of mind. Only as the mind has a self-conscious life,
is any knowledge of what matter is, or can do, to be gained.... Everything is real
which is the permanent subject of changing states. That which touches, feels, sees, is
more real than that which is touched, felt, seen.</q>
</p>

<p>
H. N. Gardner, Presb. Rev., 1885:301, 665, 666&mdash;<q>Mind gives to matter its chief meaning,&mdash;hence
matter alone can never explain the universe.</q> Gore, Incarnation, 31&mdash;<q>Mind
is not the <emph>product</emph> of nature, but the necessary <emph>constituent</emph> of nature, considered
as an ordered knowable system.</q> Fraser, Philos. of Theism: <q>An immoral act must
originate in the immoral agent; a physical effect is not <emph>known</emph> to originate in its
physical cause.</q> Matter, inorganic and organic, presupposes mind; but it is not true
that mind presupposes matter. LeConte: <q>If I could remove your brain cap, what
would I see? Only physical changes. But you&mdash;what do you perceive? Consciousness,
thought, emotion, will. Now take external nature, the Cosmos. The observer
from the outside sees only physical phenomena. But must there not be in this case
also&mdash;on the other side&mdash;psychical phenomena, a Self, a Person, a Will?</q>
</p>

<p>
The impossibility of finding in matter, regarded as mere atoms, any of the attributes
of a cause, has led to a general abandonment of this old Materialism of Democritus,
Epicurus, Lucretius, Condillac, Holbach, Feuerbach, Büchner; and Materialistic
Idealism has taken its place, which instead of regarding force as a property of matter,
regards matter as a manifestation of force. From this section we therefore pass to
Materialistic Idealism, and inquire whether the universe can be interpreted simply as a
system of force and of ideas. A quarter of a century ago, John Tyndall, in his opening
address as President of the British Association at Belfast, declared that in matter
was to be found the promise and potency of every form of life. But in 1898, Sir William
Crookes, in his address as President of that same British Association, reversed the
apothegm, and declared that in life he saw the promise and potency of every form of
matter. See Lange, History of Materialism; Janet, Materialism; Fabri, Materialismus;
Herzog, Encyclopädie, art.: Materialismus; but esp., Stallo, Modern Physics, 148-170.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>

<p>
In addition to the general error indicated above, we object to this system
as follows:
</p>

<p>
1. In knowing matter, the mind necessarily judges itself to be different
in kind, and higher in rank, than the matter which it knows.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We here state simply an intuitive conviction. The mind, in using its physical organism
and through it bringing external nature into its service, recognizes itself as different
from and superior to matter. See Martineau, quoted in Brit. Quar., April, 1882:173,
and the article of President Thomas Hill in the Bibliotheca Sacra, April, 1852:353&mdash;<q>All
that is really given by the act of sense-perception is the existence of the conscious
self, floating in boundless space and boundless time, surrounded and sustained
by boundless power. The material moved, which we at first think the great reality, is
only the shadow of a real being, which is immaterial.</q> Harris, Philos. Basis of Theism,
317&mdash;<q>Imagine an infinitesimal being in the brain, watching the action of the molecules,
but missing the thought. So science observes the universe, but misses God.</q>
Hebberd, in Journ. Spec. Philos., April, 1886:135.
</p>

<p>
Robert Browning, <q>the subtlest assertor of the soul in song,</q> makes the Pope, in
The Ring and the Book, say: <q>Mind is not matter, nor from matter, but above.</q> So
President Francis Wayland: <q>What is mind?</q> <q>No matter.</q> <q>What is matter?</q>
<q>Never mind.</q> Sully, The Human Mind, 2:369&mdash;<q>Consciousness is a reality wholly
disparate from material processes, and cannot therefore be resolved into these.
Materialism makes that which is immediately known (our mental states) subordinate
to that which is only indirectly or inferentially known (external things). Moreover, a
material entity existing <hi rend='italic'>per se</hi> out of relation to a cogitant mind is an absurdity.</q> As
materialists work out their theory, their so-called matter grows more and more ethereal,
until at last a stage is reached when it cannot be distinguished from what others
call spirit. Martineau: <q>The matter they describe is so exceedingly clever that it is
up to anything, even to writing Hamlet and discovering its own evolution. In short,
but for the spelling of its name, it does not seem to differ appreciably from our old
friends, Mind and God.</q> A. W. Momerie, in Christianity and Evolution, 54&mdash;<q>A being
conscious of his unity cannot possibly be formed out of a number of atoms unconscious
of their diversity. Any one who thinks this possible is capable of asserting that
half a dozen fools might be compounded into a single wise man.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. Since the mind's attributes of (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) continuous identity, (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) self-activity,
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) unrelatedness to space, are different in kind and higher in rank than the
attributes of matter, it is rational to conclude that mind is itself different in
kind from matter and higher in rank than matter.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This is an argument from specific qualities to that which underlies and explains the
qualities. (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Memory proves personal identity. This is not an identity of material
atoms, for atoms change. The molecules that come cannot remember those that
depart. Some immutable part in the brain? organized or unorganized? Organized
decays; unorganized = soul. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Inertia shows that matter is not self-moving. It acts
only as it is acted upon. A single atom would never move. Two portions are necessary,
and these, in order to useful action, require adjustment by a power which does not
belong to matter. Evolution of the universe inexplicable, unless matter were first
moved by some power outside itself. See Duke of Argyll, Reign of Law, 92. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The
highest activities of mind are independent of known physical conditions. Mind controls
and subdues the body. It does not cease to grow when the growth of the body
ceases. When the body nears dissolution, the mind often asserts itself most strikingly.
</p>

<p>
Kant: <q>Unity of apprehension is possible on account of the transcendental unity
of self-consciousness.</q> I get my idea of unity from the indivisible self. Stout, Manual of
Psychology, 53&mdash;<q>So far as matter exists independently of its presentation to a cognitive
subject, it cannot have material properties, such as extension, hardness, color,
weight, etc.... The world of material phenomena presupposes a system of
immaterial agency. In this immaterial system the individual consciousness originates.
This agency, some say, is <emph>thought</emph>, others <emph>will</emph>.</q> A. J. Dubois, in Century Magazine,
Dec. 1894:228&mdash;Since each thought involves a molecular movement in the brain, and this
moves the whole universe, mind is the secret of the universe, and we should interpret
nature as the expression of underlying purpose. Science is mind following the traces
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
of mind. There can be no mind without antecedent mind. That all human beings
have the same mental modes shows that these modes are not due simply to environment.
Bowne: <q>Things act upon the mind and the mind reacts with knowledge.
Knowing is not a passive receiving, but an active construing.</q> Wundt: <q>We are
compelled to admit that the physical development is not the cause, but much more the
effect, of psychical development.</q>
</p>

<p>
Paul Carus, Soul of Man, 52-64, defines soul as <q>the form of an organism,</q> and memory
as <q>the psychical aspect of the preservation of form in living substance.</q> This
seems to give priority to the organism rather than to the soul, regardless of the fact
that without soul no organism is conceivable. Clay cannot be the ancestor of the
potter, nor stone the ancestor of the mason, nor wood the ancestor of the carpenter.
W. N. Clarke, Christian Theology, 99&mdash;<q>The intelligibleness of the universe to us is
strong and ever present evidence that there is an all-pervading rational Mind, from
which the universe received its character.</q> We must add to the maxim, <q>Cogito, ergo
sum,</q> the other maxim, <q>Intelligo, ergo Deus est.</q> Pfleiderer, Philos. Relig., 1:273&mdash;<q>The
whole idealistic philosophy of modern times is in fact only the carrying out and
grounding of the conviction that Nature is ordered by Spirit and for Spirit, as a subservient
means for its eternal ends; that it is therefore not, as the heathen naturalism
thought, the one and all, the last and highest of things, but has the Spirit, and the
moral Ends over it, as its Lord and Master.</q> The consciousness by which things are
known precedes the things themselves, in the order of logic, and therefore cannot be
explained by them or derived from them. See Porter, Human Intellect, 22, 131, 132.
McCosh, Christianity and Positivism, chap. on Materialism; Divine Government, 71-94;
Intuitions, 140-145. Hopkins, Study of Man, 53-56; Morell, Hist. of Philosophy, 318-334;
Hickok, Rational Cosmology, 403; Theol. Eclectic, 6:555; Appleton, Works, 1:151-154;
Calderwood, Moral Philos., 235; Ulrici, Leib und Seele, 688-725, and synopsis, in Bap.
Quar., July, 1873:380.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
3. Mind rather than matter must therefore be regarded as the original
and independent entity, unless it can be scientifically demonstrated that
mind is material in its origin and nature. But all attempts to explain the
psychical from the physical, or the organic from the inorganic, are acknowledged
failures. The most that can be claimed is, that psychical are always
accompanied by physical changes, and that the inorganic is the basis and
support of the organic. Although the precise connection between the mind
and the body is unknown, the fact that the continuity of physical changes
is unbroken in times of psychical activity renders it certain that mind is not
transformed physical force. If the facts of sensation indicate the dependence
of mind upon body, the facts of volition equally indicate the dependence
of body upon mind.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The chemist can produce <emph>organic</emph>, but not <emph>organized</emph>, substances. The <emph>life</emph> cannot be
produced from matter. Even in living things progress is secured only by plan. Multiplication
of desired advantage, in the Darwinian scheme, requires a selecting thought;
in other words the natural selection is artificial selection after all. John Fiske,
Destiny of the Creature, 109&mdash;<q>Cerebral physiology tells us that, during the present
life, although thought and feeling are always manifested in connection with a peculiar
form of matter, yet by no possibility can thought and feeling be in any sense the
product of matter. Nothing could be more grossly unscientific than the famous remark
of Cabanis, that the brain secretes thought as the liver secretes bile. It is not even
correct to say that thought goes on in the brain. What goes on in the brain is an
amazingly complex series of molecular movements, with which thought and feeling
are in some unknown way correlated, not as effects or as causes, but as concomitants.</q>
</p>

<p>
Leibnitz's <q>preëstablished harmony</q> indicates the difficulty of defining the relation
between mind and matter. They are like two entirely disconnected clocks, the one of
which has a dial and indicates the hour by its hands, while the other without a dial
simultaneously indicates the same hour by its striking apparatus. To Leibnitz the
world is an aggregate of atomic souls leading absolutely separate lives. There is no
real action of one upon another. Everything in the monad is the development of its
individual unstimulated activity. Yet there is a preëstablished harmony of them all,
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
arranged from the beginning by the Creator. The internal development of each monad
is so adjusted to that of all the other monads, as to produce the false impression that
they are mutually influenced by each other (see Johnson, in Andover Rev., Apl. 1890:407,
408). Leibnitz's theory involves the complete rejection of the freedom of the human
will in the libertarian sense. To escape from this arbitrary connection of mind and
matter in Leibnitz's preëstablished harmony, Spinoza rejected the Cartesian doctrine
of two God-created substances, and maintained that there is but one fundamental
substance, namely, God himself (see Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 172).
</p>

<p>
There is an increased flow of blood to the head in times of mental activity. Sometimes,
in intense heat of literary composition, the blood fairly surges through the
brain. No diminution, but further increase, of physical activity accompanies the
greatest efforts of mind. Lay a man upon a balance; fire a pistol shot or inject suddenly
a great thought into his mind; at once he will tip the balance, and tumble upon
his head. Romanes, Mind and Motion, 21&mdash;<q>Consciousness causes physical changes,
but not <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>. To say that mind is a function of motion is to say that mind is a
function of itself, since motion exists only for mind. Better suppose the physical and
the psychical to be only one, as in the violin sound and vibration are one. Volition is
a cause in nature because it has cerebration for its obverse and inseparable side. But
if there is no motion without mind, then there can be no universe without God.</q>...
34&mdash;<q>Because within the limits of human experience mind is only known as associated
with brain, it does not follow that mind cannot exist without brain. Helmholtz's
explanation of the effect of one of Beethoven's sonatas on the brain may be perfectly
correct, but the explanation of the effect given by a musician may be equally correct
within its category.</q>
</p>

<p>
Herbert Spencer, Principles of Psychology, 1:§ 56&mdash;<q>Two things, mind and nervous
action, exist together, but we cannot imagine how they are related</q> (see review of
Spencer's Psychology, in N. Englander, July, 1873). Tyndall, Fragments of Science,
120&mdash;<q>The passage from the physics of the brain to the facts of consciousness is
unthinkable.</q> Schurman, Agnosticism and Religion, 95&mdash;<q>The metamorphosis of
vibrations into conscious ideas is a miracle, in comparison with which the floating of
iron or the turning of water into wine is easily credible.</q> Bain, Mind and Body, 131&mdash;There
is no break in the physical continuity. See Brit. Quar., Jan. 1874; art. by Herbert,
on Mind and the Science of Energy; McCosh, Intuitions, 145; Talbot, in Bap.
Quar., Jan. 1871. On Geulincx's <q>occasional causes</q> and Descartes's dualism, see
Martineau, Types, 144, 145, 156-158, and Study, 2:77.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
4. The materialistic theory, denying as it does the priority of spirit,
can furnish no sufficient cause for the highest features of the existing
universe, namely, its personal intelligences, its intuitive ideas, its free-will,
its moral progress, its beliefs in God and immortality.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Herbert, Modern Realism Examined: <q>Materialism has no physical evidence of the
existence of consciousness in others. As it declares our fellow men to be destitute of
free volition, so it should declare them destitute of consciousness; should call them, as
well as brutes, pure automata. If physics are all, there is no God, but there is also no
man, existing.</q> Some of the early followers of Descartes used to kick and beat their
dogs, laughing meanwhile at their cries and calling them the <q>creaking of the machine.</q>
Huxley, who calls the brutes <q>conscious automata,</q> believes in the gradual banishment,
from all regions of human thought, of what we call spirit and spontaneity:
<q>A spontaneous act is an absurdity; it is simply an effect that is uncaused.</q>
</p>

<p>
James, Psychology, 1:149&mdash;<q>The girl in Midshipman Easy could not excuse the illegitimacy
of her child by saying that <q>it was a very small one.</q> And consciousness,
however small, is an illegitimate birth in any philosophy that starts without it, and
yet professes to explain all facts by continued evolution.... Materialism denies
reality to almost all the impulses which we most cherish. Hence it will fail of universal
adoption.</q> Clerk Maxwell, Life, 391&mdash;<q>The atoms are a very tough lot, and can
stand a great deal of knocking about, and it is strange to find a number of them combining
to form a man of feeling.... 426&mdash;I have looked into most philosophical
systems, and I have seen none that will work without a God.</q> President E. B.
Andrews: <q>Mind is the only substantive thing in this universe, and all else is adjective.
Matter is not primordial, but is a function of spirit.</q> Theodore Parker: <q>Man
is the highest product of his own history. The discoverer finds nothing so tall or grand
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
as himself, nothing so valuable to him. The greatest star is at the small end of the
telescope&mdash;the star that is looking, not looked after, nor looked at.</q>
</p>

<p>
Materialism makes men to be <q>a serio-comic procession of wax figures or of cunning
casts in clay</q> (Bowne). Man is <q>the cunningest of clocks.</q> But if there were nothing
but matter, there could be no materialism, for a system of thought, like materialism,
implies consciousness. Martineau, Types, preface, xii, xiii&mdash;<q>It was the irresistible
pleading of the moral consciousness which first drove me to rebel against the limits
of the merely scientific conception. It became incredible to me that nothing was
possible except the actual.... Is there then no <emph>ought to be</emph>, other than <emph>what is</emph>?</q>
Dewey, Psychology, 84&mdash;<q>A world without ideal elements would be one in which the
home would be four walls and a roof to keep out cold and wet; the table a mess for
animals; and the grave a hole in the ground.</q> Omar Khayyám, Rubaiyat, stanza 72&mdash;<q>And
that inverted bowl they call the Sky, Whereunder crawling coop'd we live and die,
Lift not your hands to It for help&mdash;for it As impotently moves as you or I.</q> Victor
Hugo: <q>You say the soul is nothing but the resultant of bodily powers? Why then is
my soul more luminous when my bodily powers begin to fail? Winter is on my head,
and eternal spring is in my heart.... The nearer I approach the end, the plainer I
hear the immortal symphonies of the worlds which invite me.</q>
</p>

<p>
Diman, Theistic Argument, 348&mdash;<q>Materialism can never explain the fact that matter
is always combined with force. Coördinate principles? then dualism, instead of
monism. Force cause of matter? then we preserve unity, but destroy materialism;
for we trace matter to an immaterial source. Behind multiplicity of natural forces
we must postulate some single power&mdash;which can be nothing but coördinating mind.</q>
Mark Hopkins sums up Materialism in Princeton Rev., Nov. 1879:490&mdash;<q>1. Man, who is
a person, is made by a thing, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, matter. 2. Matter is to be worshiped as man's
maker, if anything is to be (<emph>Rom. 1:25</emph>). 3. Man is to worship himself&mdash;his God is his
belly.</q> See also Martineau, Religion and Materialism, 25-31, Types, 1: preface, xii,
xiii, and Study, 1:248, 250, 345; Christlieb, Modern Doubt and Christian Belief, 145-161;
Buchanan, Modern Atheism, 247, 248; McCosh, in International Rev., Jan. 1895; Contemp.
Rev., Jan. 1875, art.: Man Transcorporeal; Calderwood, Relations of Mind and
Brain; Laycock, Mind and Brain; Diman, Theistic Argument, 358; Wilkinson, in Present
Day Tracts, 3:no. 17; Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:487-499; A. H. Strong, Philos. and
Relig., 31-38.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Materialistic Idealism.</head>

<p>
Idealism proper is that method of thought which regards all knowledge
as conversant only with affections of the percipient mind.
</p>

<p>
Its element of truth is the fact that these affections of the percipient
mind are the conditions of our knowledge. Its error is in denying that
through these and in these we know that which exists independently of our
consciousness.
</p>

<p>
The idealism of the present day is mainly a materialistic idealism. It
defines matter and mind alike in terms of sensation, and regards both as
opposite sides or successive manifestations of one underlying and unknowable
force.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Modern subjective idealism is the development of a principle found as far back as
Locke. Locke derived all our knowledge from sensation; the mind only combines
ideas which sensation furnishes, but gives no material of its own. Berkeley held that
externally we can be sure only of sensations,&mdash;cannot be sure that any external world
exists apart from mind. Berkeley's idealism, however, was objective; for he maintained
that while things do not exist independently of consciousness, they do exist independently
of <emph>our</emph> consciousness, namely, in the mind of God, who in a correct philosophy
takes the place of a mindless external world as the cause of our ideas. Kant, in like
manner, held to existences outside of our own minds, although he regarded these existences
as unknown and unknowable. Over against these forms of objective idealism
we must put the subjective idealism of Hume, who held that internally also we cannot
be sure of anything but mental phenomena; we know thoughts, feelings and volitions,
but we do not know mental substance within, any more than we know material substance
without; our ideas are a string of beads, without any string; we need no cause
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
for these ideas, in an external world, a soul, or God. Mill, Spencer, Bain and Tyndall
are Humists, and it is their subjective idealism which we oppose.
</p>

<p>
All these regard the material atom as a mere centre of force, or a hypothetical cause
of sensations. Matter is therefore a manifestation of force, as to the old materialism
force was a property of matter. But if matter, mind and God are nothing but sensations,
then the body itself is nothing but sensations. There is no <emph>body</emph> to have the sensations,
and no <emph>spirit</emph>, either human or divine, to produce them. John Stuart Mill, in
his Examination of Sir William Hamilton, 1:234-253, makes sensations the only original
sources of knowledge. He defines matter as <q>a permanent possibility of sensation,</q>
and mind as <q>a series of feelings aware of itself.</q> So Huxley calls matter <q>only a
name for the unknown cause of the states of consciousness</q>; although he also declares:
<q>If I am compelled to choose between the materialism of a man like Büchner and the
idealism of Berkeley, I would have to agree with Berkeley.</q> He would hold to the
priority of matter, and yet regard matter as wholly ideal. Since John Stuart Mill, of
all the materialistic idealists, gives the most precise definitions of matter and of mind,
we attempt to show the inadequacy of his treatment.
</p>

<p>
The most complete refutation of subjective idealism is that of Sir William Hamilton,
in his Metaphysics, 348-372, and Theories of Sense-perception&mdash;the reply to Brown.
See condensed statement of Hamilton's view, with estimate and criticism, in Porter,
Human Intellect, 236-240, and on Idealism, 129, 132. Porter holds that original perception
gives us simply affections of our own sensorium; as cause of these, we gain knowledge
of extended externality. So Sir William Hamilton: <q>Sensation proper has no
object but a subject-object.</q> But both Porter and Hamilton hold that through these
sensations we know that which exists independently of our sensations. Hamilton's
natural realism, however, was an exaggeration of the truth. Bowne, Introd. to Psych.
Theory, 257, 258&mdash;<q>In Sir William Hamilton's desire to have no go-betweens in perception,
he was forced to maintain that every sensation is felt where it seems to be, and
hence that the mind fills out the entire body. Likewise he had to affirm that the object
in vision is not the thing, but the rays of light, and even the object itself had, at last,
to be brought into consciousness. Thus he reached the absurdity that the true object
in perception is something of which we are totally unconscious.</q> Surely we cannot
be immediately conscious of what is outside of consciousness. James, Psychology, 1:11&mdash;<q>The
terminal organs are telephones, and brain-cells are the receivers at which the
mind listens.</q> Berkeley's view is to be found in his Principles of Human Knowledge,
§ 18 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> See also Presb. Rev., Apl. 1885:301-315; Journ. Spec. Philos., 1884:246-260, 383-399;
Tulloch, Mod. Theories, 360, 361; Encyc. Britannica, art.: Berkeley.
</p>

<p>
There is, however, an idealism which is not open to Hamilton's objections, and to
which most recent philosophers give their adhesion. It is the objective idealism of
Lotze. It argues that we know nothing of the extended world except through the
forces which impress our nervous organism. These forces take the form of vibrations
of air or ether, and we interpret them as sound, light, or motion, according as they
affect our nerves of hearing, sight, or touch. But the only force which we immediately
know is that of our own wills, and we can either not understand matter at all or we
must understand it as the product of a will comparable to our own. Things are simply
<q>concreted laws of action,</q> or divine ideas to which permanent reality has been given
by divine will. What we perceive in the normal exercise of our faculties has existence
not only for us but for all intelligent beings and for God himself: in other words, our
idealism is not subjective, but objective. We have seen in the previous section that
atoms cannot explain the universe,&mdash;they presuppose both ideas and force. We now
see that this force presupposes will, and these ideas presuppose mind. But, as it still
may be claimed that this mind is not self-conscious mind and that this will is not personal
will, we pass in the next section to consider Idealistic Pantheism, of which these
claims are characteristic. Materialistic Idealism, in truth, is but a half-way house
between Materialism and Pantheism, in which no permanent lodging is to be found by
the logical intelligence.
</p>

<p>
Lotze, Outlines of Metaphysics, 152&mdash;<q>The objectivity of our cognition consists
therefore in this, that it is not a meaningless play of mere seeming; but it brings
before us a world whose coherency is ordered in pursuance of the injunction of
the sole Reality in the world, to wit, the Good. Our cognition thus possesses more
of truth than if it copied exactly a world that has no value in itself. Although it
does not comprehend in what manner all that is phenomenon is presented to the
view, still it understands what is the meaning of it all; and is like to a spectator
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
who comprehends the æsthetic significance of that which takes place on the stage of a
theatre, and would gain nothing essential if he were to see besides the machinery by
means of which the changes are effected on the stage.</q> Professor C. A. Strong: <q>Perception
is a shadow thrown upon the mind by a thing-in-itself. The shadow is the symbol
of the thing; and, as shadows are soulless and dead, physical objects may seem soulless
and dead, while the reality symbolized is never so soulful and alive. Consciousness is
reality. The only existence of which we can conceive is mental in its nature. All
existence <emph>for</emph> consciousness is existence <emph>of</emph> consciousness. The horse's shadow accompanies
him, but it does not help him to draw the cart. The brain-event is simply the
mental state itself regarded from the point of view of the perception.</q>
</p>

<p>
Aristotle: <q>Substance is in its nature prior to relation</q> = there can be no relation
without things to be related. Fichte: <q>Knowledge, just because it is knowledge, is
not reality,&mdash;it comes not first, but second.</q> Veitch, Knowing and Being, 216, 217, 292,
293&mdash;<q>Thought can do nothing, except as it is a synonym for Thinker.... Neither
the finite nor the infinite consciousness, alone or together, can constitute an object
external, or explain its existence. The existence of a thing logically precedes the
perception of it. Perception is not creation. It is not the thinking that makes the
ego, but the ego that makes the thinking.</q> Seth, Hegelianism and Personality:
<q>Divine thoughts presuppose a divine Being. God's thoughts do not constitute the
real world. The real force does not lie in them,&mdash;it lies in the divine Being, as living,
active Will.</q> Here was the fundamental error of Hegel, that he regarded the Universe
as mere Idea, and gave little thought to the Love and the Will that constitute it. See
John Fiske, Cosmic Philosophy, 1:75; 2:80; Contemp. Rev., Oct. 1872: art. on Huxley;
Lowndes, Philos. Primary Beliefs, 115-143; Atwater (on Ferrier), in Princeton Rev.,
1857:258, 280; Cousin, Hist. Philosophy, 2:239-343; Veitch's Hamilton, (Blackwood's
Philos. Classics,) 176, 191; A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion, 58-74.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
To this view we make the following objections:
</p>

<p>
1. Its definition of matter as a <q>permanent possibility of sensation</q>
contradicts our intuitive judgment that, in knowing the phenomena of
matter, we have direct knowledge of substance as underlying phenomena,
as distinct from our sensations, and as external to the mind which
experiences these sensations.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Bowne, Metaphysics, 432&mdash;<q>How the possibility of an odor and a flavor can be the
cause of the yellow color of an orange is probably unknowable, except to a mind that
can see that two and two may make five.</q> See Iverach's Philosophy of Spencer Examined,
in Present Day Tracts, 5: no. 29. Martineau, Study, 1:102-112&mdash;<q>If external
impressions are telegraphed to the brain, intelligence must receive the message at
the beginning as well as deliver it at the end.... It is the external object which
gives the possibility, not the possibility which gives the external object. The mind
cannot make both its <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cognita</foreign> and its <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cognitio</foreign>. It cannot dispense with standing-ground
for its own feet, or with atmosphere for its own wings.</q> Professor Charles A.
Strong: <q>Kant held to things-in-themselves back of physical phenomena, as well as to
things-in-themselves back of mental phenomena; he thought things-in-themselves
back of physical might be identical with things-in-themselves back of mental phenomena.
And since mental phenomena, on this theory, are not specimens of reality, and
reality manifests itself indifferently through them and through physical phenomena,
he naturally concluded that we have no ground for supposing reality to be like either&mdash;that
we must conceive of it as <q>weder Materie noch ein denkend Wesen</q>&mdash;<q>neither
matter nor a thinking being</q>&mdash;a theory of the Unknowable. Would that it had been
also the Unthinkable and the Unmentionable!</q> Ralph Waldo Emerson was a subjective
idealist; but, when called to inspect a farmer's load of wood, he said to his
company: <q>Excuse me a moment, my friends; we have to attend to these matters,
just as if they were real.</q> See Mivart, On Truth, 71-141.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. Its definition of mind as a <q>series of feelings aware of itself</q>
contradicts our intuitive judgment that, in knowing the phenomena of
mind, we have direct knowledge of a spiritual substance of which these
phenomena are manifestations, which retains its identity independently of
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
our consciousness, and which, in its knowing, instead of being the passive
recipient of impressions from without, always acts from within by a power
of its own.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
James, Psychology, 1:226&mdash;<q>It seems as if the elementary psychic fact were not
<emph>thought</emph>, or <emph>this thought</emph>, or <emph>that thought</emph>, but <emph>my thought</emph>, every thought being owned.
The universal conscious fact is not <q>feelings and thoughts exist,</q> but <q>I think,</q> and
<q>I feel.</q></q> Professor James is compelled to say this, even though he begins his Psychology
without insisting upon the existence of a soul. Hamilton's Reid, 443&mdash;<q>Shall I think
that thought can stand by itself? or that ideas can feel pleasure or pain?</q> R. T. Smith,
Man's Knowledge, 44&mdash;<q>We say <q>my notions and my passions,</q> and when we use these
phrases we imply that our central self is felt to be something different from the notions
or passions which belong to it or characterize it for a time.</q> Lichtenberg: <q>We should
say, <q>It thinks;</q> just as we say, <q>It lightens,</q> or <q>It rains.</q> In saying <q>Cogito,</q> the
philosopher goes too far if he translates it, <q>I think.</q></q> Are the faculties, then, an army
without a general, or an engine without a driver? In that case we should not <emph>have</emph>
sensations,&mdash;we should only <hi rend='italic'>be</hi> sensations.
</p>

<p>
Professor C. A. Strong: <q>I have knowledge of <emph>other minds</emph>. This non-empirical
knowledge&mdash;transcendent knowledge of things-in-themselves, derived neither from
experience nor reasoning, and assuming that like consequents (intelligent movements)
must have like antecedents (thoughts and feelings), and also assuming instinctively
that something exists outside of my own mind&mdash;this refutes the post-Kantian phenomenalism.
<emph>Perception</emph> and <emph>memory</emph> also involve transcendence. In both I transcend
the bounds of experience, as truly as in my knowledge of other minds. In memory
I recognize a <emph>past</emph>, as distinguished from the present. In perception I cognize a
possibility of <emph>other</emph> experiences like the present, and this alone gives the sense of
permanence and reality. Perception and memory refute phenomenalism. Things-in-themselves
must be assumed in order to fill the gaps between individual minds, and
to give coherence and intelligibility to the universe, and so to avoid pluralism. If
matter can influence and even extinguish our minds, it must have some force of its
own, some existence in itself. If consciousness is an evolutionary product, it must
have arisen from simpler mental facts. But these simpler mental facts are only another
name for things-in-themselves. A deep prerational instinct compels us to recognize
them, for they cannot be logically demonstrated. We must assume them in order
to give continuity and intelligibility to our conceptions of the universe.</q> See, on
Bain's Cerebral Psychology, Martineau's Essays, 1:265. On the physiological method
of mental philosophy, see Talbot, in Bap. Quar., 1871:1; Bowen, in Princeton Rev.,
March, 1878:423-450; Murray, Psychology, 279-287.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
3. In so far as this theory regards mind as the obverse side of matter,
or as a later and higher development from matter, the mere reference of
both mind and matter to an underlying force does not save the theory from
any of the difficulties of pure materialism already mentioned; since in
this case, equally with that, force is regarded as purely physical, and the
priority of spirit is denied.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Herbert Spencer, Psychology, quoted by Fiske, Cosmic Philosophy, 2:80&mdash;<q>Mind and
nervous action are the subjective and objective faces of the same thing. Yet we
remain utterly incapable of seeing, or even of imagining, how the two are related.
Mind still continues to us a something without kinship to other things.</q> Owen, Anatomy
of Vertebrates, quoted by Talbot, Bap. Quar., Jan. 1871:5&mdash;<q>All that I know of
matter and mind in themselves is that the former is an external centre of force, and
the latter an internal centre of force.</q> New Englander, Sept. 1883:636&mdash;<q>If the atom
be a mere centre of force and not a real thing in itself, then the atom is a supersensual
essence, an immaterial being. To make immaterial matter the source of conscious
mind is to make matter as wonderful as an immortal soul or a personal Creator.</q> See
New Englander, July, 1875:532-535; Martineau, Study, 102-130, and Relig. and Mod.
Materialism, 25&mdash;<q>If it takes mind to construe the universe, how can the negation of
mind constitute it?</q>
</p>

<p>
David J. Hill, in his Genetic Philosophy, 200, 201, seems to deny that thought precedes
force, or that force precedes thought: <q>Objects, or things in the external world,
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
may be elements of a thought-process in a cosmic subject, without themselves being
conscious.... A true analysis and a rational genesis require the equal recognition
of both the objective and the subjective elements of experience, without priority in
time, separation in space or disruption of being. So far as our minds can penetrate
reality, as disclosed in the activities of thought, we are everywhere confronted with
a Dynamic Reason.</q> In Dr. Hill's account of the genesis of the universe, however, the
unconscious comes first, and from it the conscious seems to be derived. Consciousness
of the object is only the obverse side of the object of consciousness. This is, as Martineau,
Study, 1:341, remarks, <q>to take the sea on board the boat.</q> We greatly prefer
the view of Lotze, 2:641&mdash;<q>Things are acts of the Infinite wrought within minds alone,
or states which the Infinite experiences nowhere but in minds.... Things and
events are the sum of those actions which the highest Principle performs in all spirits so
uniformly and coherently, that to these spirits there must seem to be a world of substantial
and efficient things existing in space outside themselves.</q> The data from
which we draw our inferences as to the nature of the external world being mental and
spiritual, it is more rational to attribute to that world a spiritual reality than a kind of
reality of which our experience knows nothing. See also Schurman, Belief in God,
208, 225.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
4. In so far as this theory holds the underlying force of which matter
and mind are manifestations to be in any sense intelligent or voluntary, it
renders necessary the assumption that there is an intelligent and voluntary
Being who exerts this force. Sensations and ideas, moreover, are explicable
only as manifestations of Mind.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Many recent Christian thinkers, as Murphy, Scientific Bases of Faith, 13-15, 29-36,
42-52, would define mind as a function of matter, matter as a function of force, force
as a function of will, and therefore as the power of an omnipresent and personal God.
All force, except that of man's free will, is the will of God. So Herschel, Lectures, 460;
Argyll, Reign of Law, 121-127; Wallace on Nat. Selection, 363-371; Martineau, Essays,
1:63, 121, 145, 265; Bowen, Metaph. and Ethics, 146-162. These writers are led to their
conclusion in large part by the considerations that nothing dead can be a proper cause;
that will is the only cause of which we have immediate knowledge; that the forces of
nature are intelligible only when they are regarded as exertions of will. Matter, therefore,
is simply centres of force&mdash;the regular and, as it were, automatic expression of
God's mind and will. Second causes in nature are only secondary activities of the great
First Cause.
</p>

<p>
This view is held also by Bowne, in his Metaphysics. He regards only personality as
real. Matter is phenomenal, although it is an activity of the divine will outside of us.
Bowne's phenomenalism is therefore an objective idealism, greatly preferable to that
of Berkeley who held to God's energizing indeed, but only within the soul. This
idealism of Bowne is not pantheism, for it holds that, while there are no second
causes in nature, man is a second cause, with a personality distinct from that of
God, and lifted above nature by his powers of free will. Royce, however, in his Religious
Aspect of Philosophy, and in his The World and the Individual, makes man's consciousness
a part or aspect of a universal consciousness, and so, instead of making God
come to consciousness in man, makes man come to consciousness in God. While this
scheme seems, in one view, to save God's personality, it may be doubted whether it
equally guarantees man's personality or leaves room for man's freedom, responsibility,
sin and guilt. Bowne, Philos. Theism, 175&mdash;<q><q>Universal reason</q> is a class-term which
denotes no possible existence, and which has reality only in the specific existences from
which it is abstracted.</q> Bowne claims that the impersonal finite has only such otherness
as a thought or act has to its subject. There is no substantial existence except in
persons. Seth, Hegelianism and Personality: <q>Neo-Kantianism erects into a God the
mere form of self-consciousness in general, that is, confounds consciousness <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>überhaupt</foreign>
with a <emph>universal</emph> consciousness.</q>
</p>

<p>
Bowne, Theory of Thought and Knowledge, 318-343, esp. 328&mdash;<q>Is there anything in
existence but myself? Yes. To escape solipsism I must admit at least other persons.
Does the world of apparent objects exist for me only? No; it exists for others also,
so that we live in a common world. Does this common world consist in anything more
than a similarity of impressions in finite minds, so that the world apart from these is
nothing? This view cannot be disproved, but it accords so ill with the impression of
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
our total experience that it is practically impossible. Is then the world of things a
continuous existence of some kind independent of finite thought and consciousness?
This claim cannot be demonstrated, but it is the only view that does not involve insuperable
difficulties. What is the nature and where is the place of this cosmic existence?
That is the question between Realism and Idealism. Realism views things as existing
in a real space, and as true ontological realities. Idealism views both them and the
space in which they are supposed to be existing as existing only in and for a cosmic
Intelligence, and apart from which they are absurd and contradictory. Things are
independent of <emph>our</emph> thought, but not independent of <emph>all</emph> thought, in a lumpish materiality
which is the antithesis and negation of consciousness.</q> See also Martineau,
Study, 1:214-230, 341. For advocacy of the substantive existence of second causes,
see Porter, Hum. Intellect, 582-588; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 1:596; Alden, Philosophy, 48-80;
Hodgson, Time and Space, 149-218; A. J. Balfour, in Mind, Oct. 1893: 430.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Idealistic Pantheism.</head>

<p>
Pantheism is that method of thought which conceives of the universe as
the development of one intelligent and voluntary, yet impersonal, substance,
which reaches consciousness only in man. It therefore identifies
God, not with each individual object in the universe, but with the totality
of things. The current Pantheism of our day is idealistic.
</p>

<p>
The elements of truth in Pantheism are the intelligence and voluntariness
of God, and his immanence in the universe; its error lies in denying
God's personality and transcendence.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Pantheism denies the real existence of the finite, at the same time that it deprives the
Infinite of self-consciousness and freedom. See Hunt, History of Pantheism; Manning,
Half-truths and the Truth; Bayne, Christian Life, Social and Individual, 21-53; Hutton,
on Popular Pantheism, in Essays, 1:55-76&mdash;<q>The pantheist's <q>I believe in God</q>, is
a contradiction. He says: <q>I perceive the external as different from myself; but on
further reflection, I perceive that this external was itself the percipient agency.</q> So
the worshiped is really the worshiper after all.</q> Harris, Philosophical Basis of Theism,
173&mdash;<q>Man is a bottle of the ocean's water, in the ocean, temporarily distinguishable
by its limitation within the bottle, but lost again in the ocean, so soon as these fragile
limits are broken.</q> Martineau, Types, 1:23&mdash;Mere immanency excludes Theism;
transcendency leaves it still possible; 211-225&mdash;Pantheism declares that <q>there is nothing
but God; he is not only sole cause but entire effect; he is all in all.</q> Spinoza has been
falsely called <q>the God-intoxicated man.</q> <q>Spinoza, on the contrary, translated God
into the universe; it was Malebranche who transfigured the universe into God.</q>
</p>

<p>
The later Brahmanism is pantheistic. Rowland Williams, Christianity and Hinduism,
quoted in Mozley on Miracles, 284&mdash;<q>In the final state personality vanishes. You will
not, says the Brahman, accept the term <q>void</q> as an adequate description of the mysterious
nature of the soul, but you will clearly apprehend soul, in the final state, to be
unseen and ungrasped being, thought, knowledge, joy&mdash;no other than very God.</q>
Flint, Theism, 69&mdash;<q>Where the will is without energy, and rest is longed for as the end
of existence, as among the Hindus, there is marked inability to think of God as cause
or will, and constant inveterate tendency to pantheism.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hegel denies God's transcendence: <q>God is not a spirit beyond the stars; he is spirit
in all spirit</q>; which means that God, the impersonal and unconscious Absolute, comes
to consciousness only in man. If the eternal system of abstract thoughts were itself
conscious, finite consciousness would disappear; hence the alternative is either <emph>no God</emph>,
or <emph>no man</emph>. Stirling: <q>The Idea, so conceived, is a blind, dumb, invisible idol, and
the theory is the most hopeless theory that has ever been presented to humanity.</q> It
is practical autolatry, or self-deification. The world is reduced to a mere process of
logic; thought thinks; there is thought without a thinker. To this doctrine of Hegel
we may well oppose the remarks of Lotze: <q>We cannot make mind the equivalent of the
infinitive <emph>to think</emph>,&mdash;we feel that it must be that which thinks; the essence of things
cannot be either existence or activity,&mdash;it must be that which exists and that which
acts. Thinking means nothing, if it is not the thinking of a thinker; acting and working
mean nothing, if we leave out the conception of a subject distinguishable from
them and from which they proceed.</q> To Hegel, Being <emph>is</emph> Thought; to Spinoza, Being
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
<emph>has</emph> Thought + Extension; the truth seems to be that Being <emph>has</emph> Thought + Will, and
<emph>may</emph> reveal itself in Extension and Evolution (Creation).
</p>

<p>
By other philosophers, however, Hegel is otherwise interpreted. Prof. H. Jones, in
Mind, July, 1893: 289-306, claims that Hegel's fundamental Idea is not Thought, but
Thinking: <q>The universe to him was not a system of thoughts, but a thinking reality,
manifested most fully in man.... The fundamental reality is the universal intelligence
whose operation we should seek to detect in all things. All reality is ultimately
explicable as Spirit, or Intelligence,&mdash;hence our ontology must be a Logic, and the laws
of things must be laws of thinking.</q> Sterrett, in like manner, in his Studies in Hegel's
Philosophy of Religion, 17, quotes Hegel's Logic, Wallace's translation, 89, 91, 236:
<q>Spinoza's <emph>Substance</emph> is, as it were, a dark, shapeless abyss, which devours all definite
content as utterly null, and produces from itself nothing that has positive subsistence
in itself.... God is Substance,&mdash;he is, however, no less the Absolute Person.</q> This
is essential to religion, but this, says Hegel, Spinoza never perceived: <q>Everything
depends upon the Absolute Truth being perceived, not merely as Substance, but as Subject.</q>
God is self-conscious and self-determining Spirit. Necessity is excluded. Man
is free and immortal. Men are not mechanical parts of God, nor do they lose their
identity, although they <emph>find themselves</emph> truly only in him. With this estimate of Hegel's
system, Caird, Erdmann and Mulford substantially agree. This is Tennyson's <q>Higher
Pantheism.</q>
</p>

<p>
Seth, Ethical Principles, 440&mdash;<q>Hegel conceived the superiority of his system to Spinozism
to lie in the substitution of Subject for Substance. The true Absolute must contain,
instead of abolishing, relations; the true Monism must include, instead of excluding,
Pluralism. A One which, like Spinoza's Substance, or the Hegelian Absolute, does
not enable us to think the Many, cannot be the true One&mdash;the unity of the Manifold....
Since evil exists, Schopenhauer substituted for Hegel's Panlogism, which
asserted the identity of the rational and the real, a blind impulse of life,&mdash;for absolute
Reason he substituted a reasonless Will</q>&mdash;a system of practical pessimism. Alexander,
Theories of Will, 5&mdash;<q>Spinoza recognized no distinction between will and intellectual
affirmation or denial.</q> John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 1:107&mdash;<q>As there
is no reason in the conception of pure space why any figures or forms, lines, surfaces,
solids, should arise in it, so there is no reason in the pure colorless abstraction of Infinite
Substance why any world of finite things and beings should ever come into existence.
It is the grave of all things, the productive source of nothing.</q> Hegel called Schelling's
Identity or Absolute <q>the infinite night in which all cows are black</q>&mdash;an allusion to
Goethe's Faust, part 2, act 1, where the words are added: <q>and cats are gray.</q>
Although Hegel's preference of the term Subject, instead of the term Substance, has led
many to maintain that he believed in a personality of God distinct from that of man, his
over-emphasis of the Idea, and his comparative ignoring of the elements of Love and
Will, leave it still doubtful whether his Idea was anything more than unconscious and
impersonal intelligence&mdash;less materialistic than that of Spinoza indeed, yet open to
many of the same objections.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We object to this system as follows:
</p>

<p>
1. Its idea of God is self-contradictory, since it makes him infinite, yet
consisting only of the finite; absolute, yet existing in necessary relation to
the universe; supreme, yet shut up to a process of self-evolution and
dependent for self-consciousness on man; without self-determination, yet
the cause of all that is.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Saisset, Pantheism, 148&mdash;<q>An imperfect God, yet perfection arising from imperfection.</q>
Shedd, Hist. Doctrine, 1:13&mdash;<q>Pantheism applies to God a principle of growth
and imperfection, which belongs only to the finite.</q> Calderwood, Moral Philos., 245&mdash;<q>Its
first requisite is moment, or movement, which it assumes, but does not account
for.</q> Caro's sarcasm applies here: <q>Your God is not yet made&mdash;he is in process of
manufacture.</q> See H. B. Smith, Faith and Philosophy, 25. Pantheism is practical atheism,
for impersonal spirit is only blind and necessary force. Angelus Silesius: <q>Wir
beten <q>Es gescheh, mein Herr und Gott, dein Wille</q>; Und sieh', Er hat nicht Will',&mdash;Er
ist ein ew'ge Stille</q>&mdash;which Max Müller translates as follows: <q>We pray, <q>O Lord
our God, Do thou thy holy Will</q>; and see! God has no will; He is at peace and still.</q>
Angelus Silesius consistently makes God dependent for self-consciousness on man:
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
<q>I know that God cannot live An instant without me; He must give up the ghost, If I
should cease to be.</q> Seth, Hegelianism and Personality: <q>Hegelianism destroys both
God and man. It reduces man to an object of the universal Thinker, and leaves this
universal Thinker without any true personality.</q> Pantheism is a game of solitaire, in
which God plays both sides.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. Its assumed unity of substance is not only without proof, but it directly
contradicts our intuitive judgments. These testify that we are not parts and
particles of God, but distinct personal subsistences.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Martineau, Essays, 1:158&mdash;<q>Even for immanency, there must be something wherein
to dwell, and for life, something whereon to act.</q> Many systems of monism contradict
consciousness; they confound harmony between two with absorption in one. <q>In
Scripture we never find the universe called τὸ πᾶν, for this suggests the idea of a self-contained
unity: we have everywhere τὰ πάντα instead.</q> The Bible recognizes the
element of truth in pantheism&mdash;God is <q><emph>through all</emph></q>; also the element of truth in
mysticism&mdash;God is <q><emph>in you all</emph></q>; but it adds the element of transcendence which both
these fail to recognize&mdash;God is <emph><q>above all</q> (Eph. 4:6)</emph>. See Fisher, Essays on Supernat. Orig.
of Christianity, 539. G. D. B. Pepper: <q>He who is over all and in all is yet distinct
from all. If one is over a thing, he is not that very thing which he is over. If one
is in something, he must be distinct from that something. And so the universe, over
which and in which God is, must be thought of as something distinct from God. The
creation cannot be identical with God, or a mere form of God.</q> We add, however,
that it may be a manifestation of God and dependent upon God, as our thoughts
and acts are manifestations of our mind and will and dependent upon our mind and will,
yet are not themselves our mind and will.
</p>

<p>
Pope wrote: <q>All are but parts of one stupendous whole, Whose body nature is and
God the soul.</q> But Case, Physical Realism, 193, replies: <q>Not so. Nature is to God
as works are to a man; and as man's works are not his body, so neither is nature
the body of God.</q> Matthew Arnold, On Heine's Grave: <q>What are we all but a mood,
A single mood of the life Of the Being in whom we exist, Who alone is all things
in one?</q> Hovey, Studies, 51&mdash;<q>Scripture recognizes the element of truth in pantheism,
but it also teaches the existence of a world of things, animate and inanimate, in
distinction from God. It represents men as prone to worship the creature more than the
Creator. It describes them as sinners worthy of death ... moral agents.... It no
more thinks of men as being literally parts of God, than it thinks of children as being
parts of their parents, or subjects as being parts of their king.</q> A. J. F. Behrends:
<q>The true doctrine lies between the two extremes of a crass dualism which makes God
and the world two self-contained entities, and a substantial monism in which the universe
has only a phenomenal existence. There is no identity of substance nor division of the
divine substance. The universe is eternally dependent, the product of the divine
<emph>Word</emph>, not simply <emph>manufactured</emph>. Creation is primarily a spiritual act.</q> Prof. George
M. Forbes: <q>Matter exists in subordinate dependence upon God; spirit in coördinate
dependence upon God. The body of Christ was Christ externalized, made manifest
to sense-perception. In apprehending matter, I am apprehending the mind and will of
God. This is the highest sort of reality. Neither matter nor finite spirits, then, are
mere phenomena.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
3. It assigns no sufficient cause for that fact of the universe which is
highest in rank, and therefore most needs explanation, namely, the existence
of personal intelligences. A substance which is itself unconscious, and
under the law of necessity, cannot produce beings who are self-conscious
and free.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Gess, Foundations of our Faith, 36&mdash;<q>Animal instinct, and the spirit of a nation working
out its language, might furnish analogies, if they produced personalities as their
result, but not otherwise. Nor were these tendencies self-originated, but received from
an external source.</q> McCosh, Intuitions, 215, 393, and Christianity and Positivism, 180.
Seth, Freedom as an Ethical Postulate, 47&mdash;<q>If man is an <q>imperium in imperio,</q> not a
person, but only an aspect or expression of the universe or God, then he cannot be
free. Man may be depersonalized either into nature or into God. Through the conception
of our own personality we reach that of God. To resolve our personality
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
into that of God would be to negate the divine greatness itself by invalidating the conception
through which it was reached.</q> Bradley, Appearance and Reality, 551, is more
ambiguous: <q>The positive relation of every appearance as an adjective to Reality;
and the presence of Reality among its appearances in different degrees and with diverse
values; this double truth we have found to be the centre of philosophy.</q> He protests
against both <q>an empty transcendence</q> and <q>a shallow pantheism.</q> Hegelian immanence
and knowledge, he asserts, identified God and man. But God is more than man
or man's thought. He is spirit and life&mdash;best understood from the human <emph>self</emph>, with its
thoughts, feelings, volitions. Immanence needs to be qualified by transcendence.
<q>God is not God till he has become all-in-all, and a God which is all-in-all is not the God
of religion. God is an aspect, and that must mean but an appearance of the Absolute.</q>
Bradley's Absolute, therefore, is not so much personal as super-personal; to which we
reply with Jackson, James Martineau, 416&mdash;<q>Higher than personality is lower; beyond
it is regression from its height. From the equator we may travel northward, gaining
ever higher and higher latitudes; but, if ever the pole is reached, pressing on from
thence will be descending into lower latitudes, not gaining higher.... Do I say, I am
a pantheist? Then, <hi rend='italic'>ipso facto</hi>, I deny pantheism; for, in the very assertion of the Ego,
I imply all else as objective to me.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
4. It therefore contradicts the affirmations of our moral and religious
natures by denying man's freedom and responsibility; by making God to
include in himself all evil as well as all good; and by precluding all prayer,
worship, and hope of immortality.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Conscience is the eternal witness against pantheism. Conscience witnesses to our
freedom and responsibility, and declares that moral distinctions are not illusory.
Renouf, Hibbert Lect., 234&mdash;<q>It is only out of condescension to popular language that
pantheistic systems can recognize the notions of right and wrong, of iniquity and sin.
If everything really emanates from God, there can be no such thing as sin. And the
ablest philosophers who have been led to pantheistic views have vainly endeavored
to harmonize these views with what we understand by the notion of sin or moral evil.
The great systematic work of Spinoza is entitled 'Ethica'; but for real ethics we might
as profitably consult the Elements of Euclid.</q> Hodge, System. Theology, 1:299-330&mdash;<q>Pantheism
is fatalistic. On this theory, duty = pleasure; right = might; sin = good
in the making. Satan, as well as Gabriel, is a self-development of God. The practical
effects of pantheism upon popular morals and life, wherever it has prevailed, as in
Buddhist India and China, demonstrate its falsehood.</q> See also Dove, Logic of the
Christian Faith, 118; Murphy, Scientific Bases of Faith, 202; Bib. Sac., Oct. 1867:603-615;
Dix, Pantheism, Introd., 12. On the fact of sin as refuting the pantheistic theory,
see Bushnell, Nature and the Supernat., 140-164.
</p>

<p>
Wordsworth: <q>Look up to heaven! the industrious sun Already half his course hath
run; He cannot halt or go astray; But our immortal spirits may.</q> President John H.
Harris; <q>You never ask a cyclone's opinion of the ten commandments.</q> Bowne,
Philos. of Theism, 245&mdash;<q>Pantheism makes man an automaton. But how can an
automaton have duties?</q> Principles of Ethics, 18&mdash;<q>Ethics is defined as the science
of conduct, and the conventions of language are relied upon to cover up the fact
that there is no <q>conduct</q> in the case. If man be a proper automaton, we might as well
speak of the conduct of the winds as of human conduct; and a treatise on planetary
motions is as truly the ethics of the solar system as a treatise on human movements is
the ethics of man.</q> For lack of a clear recognition of personality, either human or
divine, Hegel's Ethics is devoid of all spiritual nourishment,&mdash;his <q>Rechtsphilosophie</q>
has been called <q>a repast of bran.</q> Yet Professor Jones, in Mind, July, 1893:304, tells
us that Hegel's task was <q>to discover what conception of the single principle or fundamental
unity which alone <emph>is</emph>, is adequate to the differences which it carries within it.
<q><emph>Being</emph>,</q> he found, leaves no room for differences,&mdash;it is overpowered by them....
He found that the Reality can exist only as absolute Self-consciousness, as a Spirit,
who is universal, and who knows himself in all things. In all this he is dealing, not
simply with thoughts, but with Reality.</q> Prof. Jones's vindication of Hegel, however,
still leaves it undecided whether that philosopher regarded the divine self-consciousness
as distinct from that of finite beings, or as simply inclusive of theirs. See John Caird,
Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 1:109.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>

<p>
5. Our intuitive conviction of the existence of a God of absolute perfection
compels us to conceive of God as possessed of every highest quality
and attribute of men, and therefore, especially, of that which constitutes
the chief dignity of the human spirit, its personality.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Diman, Theistic Argument, 328&mdash;<q>We have no right to represent the supreme Cause
as inferior to ourselves, yet we do this when we describe it under phrases derived from
physical causation.</q> Mivart, Lessons from Nature, 351&mdash;<q>We cannot conceive of anything
as impersonal, yet of higher nature than our own,&mdash;any being that has not
knowledge and will must be indefinitely inferior to one who has them.</q> Lotze holds
truly, not that God is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>supra</foreign>-personal, but that man is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>infra</foreign>-personal, seeing that in the
infinite Being alone is self-subsistence, and therefore perfect personality. Knight,
Essays in Philosophy, 224&mdash;<q>The radical feature of personality is the survival of a
permanent self, under all the fleeting or deciduous phases of experience; in other
words, the personal identity that is involved in the assertion <q>I am.</q>... Is limitation a
necessary adjunct of that notion?</q> Seth, Hegelianism: <q>As in us there is more <emph>for
ourselves</emph> than <emph>for others</emph>, so in God there is more of thought <emph>for himself</emph> than he manifests
<emph>to us</emph>. Hegel's doctrine is that of immanence without transcendence.</q> Heinrich
Heine was a pupil and intimate friend of Hegel. He says: <q>I was young and proud,
and it pleased my vain-glory when I learned from Hegel that the true God was not, as
my grandmother believed, the God who lived in heaven, but was rather <emph>myself upon
the earth</emph>.</q> John Fiske, Idea of God, xvi&mdash;<q>Since our notion of force is purely a
generalization from our subjective sensations of overcoming resistance, there is scarcely
less anthropomorphism in the phrase <q>Infinite Power</q> than in the phrase <q>Infinite
Person.</q> We must symbolize Deity in some form that has meaning to us; we cannot
symbolize it as physical; we are bound to symbolize it as psychical. Hence we may
say, God is Spirit. This implies God's personality.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
6. Its objection to the divine personality, that over against the Infinite
there can be in eternity past no non-ego to call forth self-consciousness, is
refuted by considering that even man's cognition of the non-ego logically
presupposes knowledge of the ego, from which the non-ego is distinguished;
that, in an absolute mind, self-consciousness cannot be conditioned, as in
the case of finite mind, upon contact with a not-self; and that, if the distinguishing
of self from a not-self were an essential condition of divine
self-consciousness, the eternal personal distinctions in the divine nature or
the eternal states of the divine mind might furnish such a condition.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Pfleiderer, Die Religion, 1:163, 190 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>&mdash;<q>Personal self-consciousness is not primarily
a distinguishing of the ego from the non-ego, but rather a distinguishing of itself from
itself, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, of the unity of the self from the plurality of its contents.... Before
the soul distinguishes self from the not-self, it must know self&mdash;else it could not see
the distinction. Its development is connected with the knowledge of the non-ego, but
this is due, not to the fact of <emph>personality</emph>, but to the fact of <emph>finite</emph> personality. The
mature man can live for a long time upon his own resources. God needs no other, to
stir him up to mental activity. Finiteness is a hindrance to the development of our
personality. Infiniteness is necessary to the highest personality.</q> Lotze, Microcosmos,
vol. 3, chapter 4; transl. in N. Eng., March, 1881:191-200&mdash;<q>Finite spirit, not
having conditions of existence in itself, can know the ego only upon occasion of knowing
the non-ego. The Infinite is not so limited. He alone has an independent existence,
neither introduced nor developed through anything not himself, but, in an inward
activity without beginning or end, maintains himself in himself.</q> See also Lotze,
Philos. of Religion, 55-69; H. N. Gardiner on Lotze, in Presb. Rev., 1885:669-673; Webb,
in Jour. Theol. Studies, 2:49-61.
</p>

<p>
Dorner, Glaubenslehre: <q>Absolute Personality = perfect consciousness of self, and
perfect power over self. We need something external to waken our consciousness&mdash;yet
self-consciousness comes [logically] before consciousness of the world. It is the soul's
act. Only after it has distinguished self from self, can it consciously distinguish self
from another.</q> British Quarterly, Jan. 1874:32, note; July, 1884:108&mdash;<q>The ego is
<emph>thinkable</emph> only in relation to the non-ego; but the ego is <emph>liveable</emph> long before any such
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
relation.</q> Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:185, 186&mdash;In the pantheistic scheme, <q>God distinguishes
himself from the <emph>world</emph>, and thereby finds the object required by the subject;
... in the Christian scheme, God distinguishes himself from <emph>himself</emph>, not from something
that is not himself.</q> See Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 2:122-126; Christlieb, Mod.
Doubt and Christ. Belief, 161-190; Hanne, Idee der absoluten Persönlichkeit; Eichhorn,
Die Persönlichkeit Gottes; Seth, Hegelianism and Personality; Knight, on Personality
and the Infinite, in Studies in Philos. and Lit., 70-118.
</p>

<p>
On the whole subject of Pantheism, see Martineau, Study of Religion, 2:141-194,
esp. 192&mdash;<q>The <emph>personality</emph> of God consists in his voluntary agency as free cause in an
unpledged sphere, that is, a sphere transcending that of immanent law. But precisely
this also it is that constitutes his <emph>infinity</emph>, extending his sway, after it has filled the
actual, over all the possible, and giving command over indefinite alternatives. Though
you might deny his infinity without prejudice to his personality, you cannot deny his
personality without sacrificing his infinitude: for there is a mode of action&mdash;the <emph>preferential</emph>,
the very mode which distinguishes rational beings&mdash;from which you exclude
him</q>; 341&mdash;<q>The metaphysicians who, in their impatience of distinction, insist on
taking the sea on board the boat, swamp not only it but the thought it holds, and leave
an infinitude which, as it can look into no eye and whisper into no ear, they contradict
in the very act of affirming.</q> Jean Paul Richter's <q>Dream</q>: <q>I wandered to the
farthest verge of Creation, and there I saw a <emph>Socket</emph>, where an <emph>Eye</emph> should have been,
and I heard the shriek of a Fatherless World</q> (quoted in David Brown's Memoir of
John Duncan, 49-70). Shelley, Beatrice Cenci: <q>Sweet Heaven, forgive weak
thoughts! If there should be No God, no Heaven, no Earth, in the void world&mdash;The
wide, grey, lampless, deep, unpeopled world!</q>
</p>

<p>
For the opposite view, see Biedermann, Dogmatik, 638-647&mdash;<q>Only man, as finite
spirit, is personal; God, as absolute spirit, is not personal. Yet in religion the mutual
relations of intercourse and communion are always personal.... Personality is the only
adequate term by which we can represent the theistic conception of God.</q> Bruce, Providential
Order, 76&mdash;<q>Schopenhauer does not level up cosmic force to the human, but
levels down human will-force to the cosmic. Spinoza held intellect in God to be no
more like man's than the dog-star is like a dog. Hartmann added intellect to Schopenhauer's
will, but the intellect is unconscious and knows no moral distinctions.</q> See also
Bruce, Apologetics, 71-90; Bowne, Philos. of Theism, 128-134, 171-186; J. M. Whiton,
Am. Jour. Theol., Apl. 1901:306&mdash;Pantheism = God consists in all things; Theism = All
things consist in God, their ground, not their sum. Spirit in man shows that the
infinite Spirit must be personal and transcendent Mind and Will.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Ethical Monism.</head>

<p>
Ethical Monism is that method of thought which holds to a single substance,
ground, or principle of being, namely, God, but which also holds
to the ethical facts of God's transcendence as well as his immanence, and
of God's personality as distinct from, and as guaranteeing, the personality
of man.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Although we do not here assume the authority of the Bible, reserving our proof of
this to the next following division on The Scriptures a Revelation from God, we may
yet cite passages which show that our doctrine is not inconsistent with the teachings
of holy Writ. The immanence of God is implied in all statements of his omnipresence,
as for example: <emph>Ps. 139:7 sq.&mdash;<q>Whither shall I go from thy spirit? Or whither shall I flee from thy presence?</q></emph>
<emph>Jer. 23:23, 24&mdash;<q>Am I a God at hand, saith Jehovah, and not a God afar off?... Do not I fill heaven
and earth?</q></emph> <emph>Acts 17:27, 28&mdash;<q>he is not far from each one of us: for in him we live, and move, and have our
being.</q></emph> The transcendence of God is implied in such passages as: <emph>1 Kings 8:27&mdash;<q>the heaven
and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee</q></emph>; <emph>Ps. 113:5&mdash;<q>that hath his seat on high</q></emph>; <emph>Is. 57:15&mdash;<q>the high
and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
This is the faith of Augustine: <q>O God, thou hast made us for thyself, and our
heart is restless till it find rest in thee.... I could not be, O my God, could not be
at all, wert thou not in me; rather, were not I in thee, of whom are all things, by whom
are all things, in whom are all things.</q> And Anselm, in his Proslogion, says of the
divine nature: <q>It is the essence of the being, the principle of the existence, of all
things.... Without parts, without differences, without accidents, without changes,
it might be said in a certain sense alone to exist, for in respect to it the other things
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
which appear to be have no existence. The unchangeable Spirit is all that is, and it is this
without limit, simply, interminably. It is the perfect and absolute Existence. The
rest has come from non-entity, and thither returns if not supported by God. It does
not exist by itself. In this sense the Creator alone exists; created things do not.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
1. While Ethical Monism embraces the one element of truth contained
in Pantheism&mdash;the truth that God is in all things and that all things are in
God&mdash;it regards this scientific unity as entirely consistent with the facts of
ethics&mdash;man's freedom, responsibility, sin, and guilt; in other words,
Metaphysical Monism, or the doctrine of one substance, ground, or principle
of being, is qualified by Psychological Dualism, or the doctrine that
the soul is personally distinct from matter on the one hand, and from God
on the other.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Ethical Monism is a monism which holds to the ethical facts of the freedom of man
and the transcendence and personality of God; it is the monism of free-will, in which personality,
both human and divine, sin and righteousness, God and the world, remain&mdash;two
in one, and one in two&mdash;in their moral antithesis as well as their natural unity.
Ladd, Introd. to Philosophy: <q>Dualism is yielding, in history and in the judgment-halls
of reason, to a monistic philosophy.... Some form of philosophical monism
is indicated by the researches of psycho-physics, and by that philosophy of mind which
builds upon the principles ascertained by these researches. Realities correlated as are
the body and the mind must have, as it were, a common ground.... They have
their reality in the ultimate one Reality; they have their interrelated lives as expressions
of the one Life which is immanent in the two.... Only some form of monism
that shall satisfy the facts and truths to which both realism and idealism appeal can
occupy the place of the true and final philosophy.... Monism must so construct its
tenets as to preserve, or at least as not to contradict and destroy, the truths implicated
in the distinction between the <emph>me</emph> and the <emph>not-me</emph>, ... between the morally good
and the morally evil. No form of monism can persistently maintain itself which erects
its system upon the ruins of fundamentally ethical principles and ideals.</q>... Philosophy
of Mind, 411&mdash;<q>Dualism must be dissolved in some ultimate monistic solution.
The Being of the world, of which all particular beings are but parts, must be so conceived
of as that in it can be found the one ground of all interrelated existences and
activities.... This one Principle is an Other and an Absolute Mind.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dorner, Hist. Doct. Person of Christ, II, 3:101, 231&mdash;<q>The unity of essence in God and
man is the great discovery of the present age.... The characteristic feature of all
recent Christologies is the endeavor to point out the essential unity of the divine and
human. To the theology of the present day, the divine and human are not mutually
exclusive, but are connected magnitudes.... Yet faith postulates a difference between
the world and God, between whom religion seeks an union. Faith does not wish
to be a relation merely to itself, or to its own representations and thoughts; that
would be a monologue,&mdash;faith desires a dialogue. Therefore it does not consort with a
monism which recognizes only God, or only the world; it opposes such a monism as
this. Duality is, in fact, a condition of true and vital unity. But duality is not dualism.
It has no desire to oppose the rational demand for unity.</q> Professor Small of
Chicago: <q>With rare exceptions on each side, all philosophy to-day is monistic in its
ontological presumptions; it is dualistic in its methodological procedures.</q> A. H.
Bradford, Age of Faith, 71&mdash;<q>Men and God are the same in substance, though not
identical as individuals.</q> The theology of fifty years ago was merely individualistic,
and ignored the complementary truth of solidarity. Similarly we think of the continents
and islands of our globe as disjoined from one another. The dissociable sea is
regarded as an absolute barrier between them. But if the ocean could be dried, we
should see that all the while there had been submarine connections, and the hidden
unity of all lands would appear. So the individuality of human beings, real as it is, is
not the only reality. There is the profounder fact of a common life. Even the great
mountain-peaks of personality are superficial distinctions, compared with the organic
oneness in which they are rooted, into which they all dip down, and from which they
all, like volcanoes, receive at times quick and overflowing impulses of insight, emotion
and energy; see A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation and Ethical Monism, 189, 190.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>

<p>
2. In contrast then with the two errors of Pantheism&mdash;the denial of
God's transcendence and the denial of God's personality&mdash;Ethical Monism
holds that the universe, instead of being one with God and conterminous
with God, is but a finite, partial and progressive manifestation of the divine
Life: Matter being God's self-limitation under the law of Necessity;
Humanity being God's self-limitation under the law of Freedom; Incarnation
and Atonement being God's self-limitations under the law of Grace.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The universe is related to God as my thoughts are related to me, the thinker. I am
greater than my thoughts, and my thoughts vary in moral value. Ethical Monism traces
the universe back to a beginning, while Pantheism regards the universe as coëternal
with God. Ethical Monism asserts God's transcendence, while Pantheism regards
God as imprisoned in the universe. Ethical Monism asserts that the heaven of heavens
cannot contain him, but that contrariwise the whole universe taken together, with its
elements and forces, its suns and systems, is but a light breath from his mouth, or a
drop of dew upon the fringe of his garment. Upton, Hibbert Lectures: <q>The Eternal
is present in every finite thing, and is felt and known to be present in every rational
soul; but still is not broken up into individualities, but ever remains one and the
same eternal substance, one and the same unifying principle, immanently and indivisibly
present in every one of that countless plurality of finite individuals into which
man's analyzing understanding dissects the Cosmos.</q> James Martineau, in 19th Century,
Apl. 1895:559&mdash;<q>What is Nature but the province of God's pledged and habitual
causality? And what is Spirit, but the province of his free causality, responding to the
needs and affections of his children?... God is not a retired architect, who may now
and then be called in for repairs. Nature is not self-active, and God's agency is
not intrusive.</q> Calvin: Pie hoc potest dici, Deum esse Naturam.
</p>

<p>
With this doctrine many poets show their sympathy. <q>Every fresh and new creation,
A divine improvisation, From the heart of God proceeds.</q> Robert Browning
asserts God's immanence; Hohenstiel-Schwangau: <q>This is the glory that, in all conceived
Or felt, or known, I recognize a Mind&mdash;Not mine, but like mine&mdash;for the double
joy, Making all things for me, and me for him</q>; Ring and Book, Pope: <q>O thou, as
represented to me here In such conception as my soul allows&mdash;Under thy measureless,
my atom-width! Man's mind, what is it but a convex glass, Wherein are gathered all
the scattered points Picked out of the immensity of sky, To reunite there, be our heaven
for earth, Our Known Unknown, our God revealed to man?</q> But Browning also asserts
God's transcendence: in Death in the Desert, we read: <q>Man is not God, but hath
God's end to serve, A Master to obey, a Cause to take, Somewhat to cast off, somewhat
to become</q>; in Christmas Eve, the poet derides <q>The important stumble Of adding,
he, the sage and humble, Was also one with the Creator</q>; he tells us that it was God's
plan to make man in his image: <q>To create man, and then leave him Able, his own
word saith, to grieve him; But able to glorify him too, As a mere machine could never
do That prayed or praised, all unaware Of its fitness for aught but praise or prayer,
Made perfect as a thing of course.... God, whose pleasure brought Man into being,
stands away, As it were, a hand-breadth off, to give Room for the newly made to live
And look at him from a place apart And use his gifts of brain and heart</q>; <q>Life's
business being just the terrible choice.</q>
</p>

<p>
So Tennyson's Higher Pantheism: <q>The sun, the moon, the stars, the seas, the hills,
and the plains, Are not these, O soul, the vision of Him who reigns? Dark is the world to
thee; thou thyself art the reason why; For is not He all but thou, that hast power
to feel <q>I am I</q>? Speak to him, thou, for he hears, and spirit with spirit can meet;
Closer is he than breathing, and nearer than hands and feet. And the ear of man cannot
hear, and the eye of man cannot see; But if we could see and hear, this vision&mdash;were
it not He?</q> Also Tennyson's Ancient Sage: <q>But that one ripple on the boundless
deep Feels that the deep is boundless, and itself Forever changing form, but evermore
One with the boundless motion of the deep</q>; and In Memoriam: <q>One God, one
law, one element, And one far-off divine event, Toward which the whole creation
moves.</q> Emerson: <q>The day of days, the greatest day in the feast of life, is that in
which the inward eye opens to the unity of things</q>; <q>In the mud and scum of things
Something always, always sings.</q> Mrs. Browning: <q>Earth is crammed with heaven,
And every common bush afire with God; But only he who sees takes off his shoes.</q> So
manhood is itself potentially a divine thing. All life, in all its vast variety, can have
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
but one Source. It is either one God, above all, through all, and in all, or it is no God
at all. E. M. Poteat, On Chesapeake Bay: <q>Night's radiant glory overhead, A softer
glory there below, Deep answered unto deep, and said: A kindred fire in us doth glow.
For life is one&mdash;of sea and stars, Of God and man, of earth and heaven&mdash;And by no
theologic bars Shall my scant life from God's be riven.</q> See Professor Henry Jones,
Robert Browning.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
3. The immanence of God, as the one substance, ground and principle
of being, does not destroy, but rather guarantees, the individuality and
rights of each portion of the universe, so that there is variety of rank and
endowment. In the case of moral beings, worth is determined by the
degree of their voluntary recognition and appropriation of the divine.
While God is all, he is also in all; so making the universe a graded and progressive
manifestation of himself, both in his love for righteousness and
his opposition to moral evil.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It has been charged that the doctrine of monism necessarily involves moral indifference;
that the divine presence in all things breaks down all distinctions of rank and
makes each thing equal to every other; that the evil as well as the good is legitimated
and consecrated. Of pantheistic monism all this is true,&mdash;it is not true of ethical
monism; for ethical monism is the monism that recognizes the ethical fact of personal
intelligence and will in both God and man, and with these God's purpose in making the
universe a varied manifestation of himself. The worship of cats and bulls and crocodiles
in ancient Egypt, and the deification of lust in the Brahmanic temples of India,
were expressions of a non-ethical monism, which saw in God no moral attributes, and
which identified God with his manifestations. As an illustration of the mistakes into
which the critics of monism may fall for lack of discrimination between monism that
is pantheistic and monism that is ethical, we quote from Emma Marie Caillard: <q>Integral
parts of God are, on monistic premises, liars, sensualists, murderers, evil livers
and evil thinkers of every description. Their crimes and their passions enter intrinsically
into the divine experience. The infinite Individual in his wholeness may reject
them indeed, but none the less are these evil finite individuals constituent parts of him,
even as the twigs of a tree, though they are not the tree, and though the tree transcends
any or all of them, are yet constituent parts of it. Can he whose universal consciousness
includes and defines all finite consciousnesses be other than responsible for all
finite actions and motives?</q>
</p>

<p>
To this indictment we may reply in the words of Bowne, The Divine Immanence,
130-133&mdash;<q rend='pre'>Some weak heads have been so heated by the new wine of immanence
as to put all things on the same level, and make men and mice of equal value. But
there is nothing in the dependence of all things on God to remove their distinctions
of value. One confused talker of this type was led to say that he had no trouble with
the notion of a divine man, as he believed in a divine oyster. Others have used the
doctrine to cancel moral differences; for if God be in all things, and if all things represent
his will, then whatever is is right. But this too is hasty. Of course even the evil will
is not independent of God, but lives and moves and has its being in and through the
divine. But through its mysterious power of selfhood and self-determination the evil
will is able to assume an attitude of hostility to the divine law, which forthwith
vindicates itself by appropriate reactions.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>These reactions are not divine in the highest or ideal sense. They represent nothing
which God desires or in which he delights; but they are divine in the sense that they
are things to be done under the circumstances. The divine reaction in the case of the
good is distinct from the divine reaction against evil. Both are divine as representing
God's action, but only the former is divine in the sense of representing God's approval
and sympathy. All things serve, said Spinoza. The good serve, and are furthered by
their service. The bad also serve and are used up in the serving. According to
Jonathan Edwards, the wicked are useful <q>in being acted upon and disposed of.</q> As
<q>vessels of dishonor</q> they may reveal the majesty of God. There is nothing therefore
in the divine immanence, in its only tenable form, to cancel moral distinctions or to
minify retribution. The divine reaction against iniquity is even more solemn in this
doctrine. The besetting God is the eternal and unescapable environment; and only as
we are in harmony with him can there be any peace.... What God thinks of sin,
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
and what his will is concerning it can be plainly seen in the natural consequences which
attend it.... In law itself we are face to face with God; and natural consequences
have a supernatural meaning.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
4. Since Christ is the Logos of God, the immanent God, God revealed
in Nature, in Humanity, in Redemption, Ethical Monism recognizes the
universe as created, upheld, and governed by the same Being who in the
course of history was manifest in human form and who made atonement
for human sin by his death on Calvary. The secret of the universe and
the key to its mysteries are to be found in the Cross.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>John 1:1-4 (marg.), 14, 18&mdash;<q>In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made through him; and without him was not
any thing made. That which hath been made was life in him; and the life was the light of men.... And the
Word became flesh, and dwelt among us.... No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, who
is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him.</q></emph> <emph>Col. 1:16, 17&mdash;<q>for in him were all things created, in the
heavens and upon the earth, things visible and things invisible, whether thrones or dominions or principalities or
powers; all things have been created through him and unto him; and he is before all things, and in him all things
consist.</q></emph> <emph>Heb. 1:2, 3&mdash;<q>his Son ... through whom also he made the worlds ... upholding all things by the
word of his power</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 1:22, 23&mdash;<q>the church, which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all</q></emph> = fills
all things with all that they contain of truth, beauty, and goodness; <emph>Col. 2:2, 3, 9&mdash;<q>the
mystery of God, even Christ, in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hidden ... for in him dwelleth
all the fulness of the Godhead bodily.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
This view of the relation of the universe to God lays the foundation for a Christian
application of recent philosophical doctrine. Matter is no longer blind and dead, but is
spiritual in its nature, not in the sense that it <emph>is</emph> spirit, but in the sense that it is the
continual <emph>manifestation</emph> of spirit, just as my thoughts are a living and continual manifestation
of myself. Yet matter does not consist simply in <emph>ideas</emph>, for ideas, deprived of
an external object and of an internal subject, are left suspended in the air. Ideas are the
product of Mind. But matter is known only as the operation of force, and force is the
product of Will. Since this force works in rational ways, it can be the product only of
Spirit. The system of forces which we call the universe is the immediate product of
the mind and will of God; and, since Christ is the mind and will of God in exercise,
Christ is the Creator and Upholder of the universe. Nature is the omnipresent Christ,
manifesting God to creatures.
</p>

<p>
Christ is the principle of cohesion, attraction, interaction, not only in the physical
universe, but in the intellectual and moral universe as well. In all our knowing,
the knower and known are <q>connected by some Being who is their reality,</q> and
this being is Christ, <emph><q>the Light which lighteth every man</q> (John 1:9)</emph>. We <emph>know</emph> in Christ,
just as <emph><q>in him we live, and move, and have our being</q> (Acts 17:28)</emph>. As the attraction of
gravitation and the principle of evolution are only other names for Christ, so he is
the basis of inductive reasoning and the ground of moral unity in the creation. I am
bound to love my neighbor as myself because he has in him the same life that is in me,
the life of God in Christ. The Christ in whom all humanity is created, and in whom all
humanity consists, holds together the moral universe, drawing all men to himself and
so drawing them to God. Through him God <emph><q>reconciles all things unto himself ... whether
things upon the earth, or things in the heavens</q> (Col. 1:20)</emph>.
</p>

<p>
As Pantheism = exclusive immanence = God imprisoned, so Deism = exclusive transcendence
= God banished. Ethical Monism holds to the truth contained in each of
these systems, while avoiding their respective errors. It furnishes the basis for a new
interpretation of many theological as well as of many philosophical doctrines. It helps
our understanding of the Trinity. If within the bounds of God's being there can exist
multitudinous finite personalities, it becomes easier to comprehend how within those
same bounds there can be three eternal and infinite personalities,&mdash;indeed, the integration
of plural consciousnesses in an all-embracing divine consciousness may find a valid
analogy in the integration of subordinate consciousnesses in the unit-personality of
man; see Baldwin, Handbook of Psychology, Feeling and Will, 53, 54.
</p>

<p>
Ethical Monism, since it is ethical, leaves room for human wills and for their freedom.
While man could never break the natural bond which united him to God, he
could break the spiritual bond and introduce into creation a principle of discord and
evil. Tie a cord tightly about your finger; you partially isolate the finger, diminish
its nutrition, bring about atrophy and disease. So there has been given to each intelligent
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
and moral agent the power, spiritually to isolate himself from God while yet he
is naturally joined to God. As humanity is created in Christ and lives only in Christ,
man's self-isolation is his moral separation from Christ. Simon, Redemption of Man,
339&mdash;<q>Rejecting Christ is not so much refusal to <emph>become</emph> one with Christ as it is refusal
to <emph>remain</emph> one with him, refusal to let him be our life.</q> All men are naturally one
with Christ by physical birth, before they become morally one with him by spiritual
birth. They may set themselves against him and may oppose him forever. This our
Lord intimates, when he tells us that there are natural branches of Christ, which do not
<emph><q>abide in the vine</q></emph> or <emph><q>bear fruit,</q></emph> and so are <emph><q>cast forth,</q></emph> <emph><q>withered,</q></emph> and <emph><q>burned</q> (John 15:4-6)</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Ethical Monism, however, since it is Monism, enables us to understand the principle
of the Atonement. Though God's holiness binds him to punish sin, the Christ who has
joined himself to the sinner must share the sinner's punishment. He who is the life of
humanity must take upon his own heart the burden of shame and penalty that belongs
to his members. Tie the cord about your finger; not only the finger suffers pain, but
also the heart; the life of the whole system rouses itself to put away the evil, to untie
the cord, to free the diseased and suffering member. Humanity is bound to Christ, as
the finger to the body. Since human nature is one of the <emph><q>all things</q></emph> that <emph><q>consist</q></emph> or
hold together in Christ (<emph>Col 1:17</emph>), and man's sin is a self-perversion of a part of Christ's
own body, the whole must be injured by the self-inflicted injury of the part, and <emph><q>it
must needs be that Christ should suffer</q> (Acts 17:3)</emph>. Simon, Redemption of Man, 321&mdash;<q>If the
Logos is the Mediator of the divine immanence in creation, especially in man; if men
are differentiations of the effluent divine energy; and if the Logos is the immanent
controlling principle of all differentiation&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, the principle of all <emph>form</emph>&mdash;must not
the self-perversion of these human differentiations react on him who is their constitutive
principle?</q> A more full explanation of the relations of Ethical Monism to other
doctrines must be reserved to our separate treatment of the Trinity, Creation, Sin,
Atonement, Regeneration. Portions of the subject are treated by Upton, Hibbert
Lectures; Le Conte, in Royce's Conception of God, 43-50; Bowne, Theory of Thought
and Knowledge, 297-301, 311-317, and Immanence of God, 5-32, 116-153; Ladd, Philos. of
Knowledge, 574-590, and Theory of Reality, 525-529; Edward Caird, Evolution of
Religion, 2:48; Ward, Naturalism and Agnosticism, 2:258-283; Göschel, quoted in
Dorner, Hist. Doct. Person of Christ, 5:170. An attempt has been made to treat the
whole subject by A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation and Ethical Monism, 1-86, 141-162,
166-180, 186-208.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part III. The Scriptures A Revelation From God.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Preliminary Considerations.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Reasons <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> for expecting a Revelation from God.</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Needs of man's nature.</hi> Man's intellectual and moral nature requires,
in order to preserve it from constant deterioration, and to ensure its moral
growth and progress, an authoritative and helpful revelation of religious
truth, of a higher and completer sort than any to which, in its present state
of sin, it can attain by the use of its unaided powers. The proof of this
proposition is partly psychological, and partly historical.
</p>

<p>
A. Psychological proof.&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Neither reason nor intuition throws light
upon certain questions whose solution is of the utmost importance to us; for
example, Trinity, atonement, pardon, method of worship, personal existence
after death. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Even the truth to which we arrive by our natural powers
needs divine confirmation and authority when it addresses minds and wills
perverted by sin. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) To break this power of sin, and to furnish encouragement
to moral effort, we need a special revelation of the merciful and helpful
aspect of the divine nature.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Bremen Lectures, 72, 73; Plato, Second Alcibiades, 22, 23; Phædo, 85&mdash;λόγου θείου
τινός. Iamblicus, περὶ τοῦ Πυθαγορικοῦ βίου, chap. 28. Æschylus, in his Agamemnon,
shows how completely reason and intuition failed to supply the knowledge of God
which man needs: <q>Renown is loud,</q> he says, <q>and not to lose one's senses is God's
greatest gift.... The being praised outrageously Is grave; for at the eyes of such
a one Is launched, from Zeus, the thunder-stone. Therefore do I decide For so much
and no more prosperity Than of his envy passes unespied.</q> Though the gods might
have favorites, they did not love men as men, but rather, envied and hated them.
William James, Is Life Worth Living? in Internat. Jour. Ethics, Oct. 1895:10&mdash;<q>All
we know of good and beauty proceeds from nature, but none the less all we know of
evil.... To such a harlot we owe no moral allegiance.... If there be a divine
Spirit of the universe, nature, such as we know her, cannot possibly be its ultimate
word to man. Either there is no Spirit revealed in nature, or else it is inadequately
revealed there; and, as all the higher religions have assumed, what we call visible
nature, or <emph>this</emph> world, must be but a veil and surface-show whose full meaning resides
in a supplementary unseen or <emph>other</emph> world.</q>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Versus</hi> Socrates: Men will do right, if they only know the right. Pfleiderer,
Philos. Relig., 1:219&mdash;<q>In opposition to the opinion of Socrates that badness rests upon
ignorance, Aristotle already called the fact to mind that the doing of the good is not
always combined with the knowing of it, seeing that it depends also on the passions.
If badness consisted only in the want of knowledge, then those who are theoretically
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
most cultivated must also be morally the best, which no one will venture to assert.</q>
W. S. Lilly, On Shibboleths: <q>Ignorance is often held to be the root of all evil. But
mere knowledge cannot transform character. It cannot minister to a mind diseased.
It cannot convert the will from bad to good. It may turn crime into different channels,
and render it less easy to detect. It does not change man's natural propensities or his
disposition to gratify them at the expense of others. Knowledge makes the good man
more powerful for good, the bad man more powerful for evil. And that is all it can
do.</q> Gore, Incarnation, 174&mdash;<q>We must not depreciate the method of argument, for
Jesus and Paul occasionally used it in a Socratic fashion, but we must recognize that
it is not the basis of the Christian system nor the primary method of Christianity.</q>
Martineau, in Nineteenth Century, 1:331, 531, and Types, 1:112&mdash;<q>Plato dissolved the
idea of the right into that of the good, and this again was indistinguishably mingled
with that of the true and the beautiful.</q> See also Flint, Theism, 305.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Versus</hi> Thomas Paine: <q>Natural religion teaches us, without the possibility of
being mistaken, all that is necessary or proper to be known.</q> Plato, Laws, 9:854, <hi rend='italic'>c</hi>,
for substance: <q>Be good; but, if you cannot, then kill yourself.</q> Farrar, Darkness
and Dawn, 75&mdash;<q>Plato says that man will never know God until God has revealed himself
in the guise of suffering man, and that, when all is on the verge of destruction,
God sees the distress of the universe, and, placing himself at the rudder, restores it to
order.</q> Prometheus, the type of humanity, can never be delivered <q>until some god
descends for him into the black depths of Tartarus.</q> Seneca in like manner teaches
that man cannot save himself. He says: <q>Do you wonder that men go to the gods?
God comes <emph>to</emph> men, yes, <emph>into</emph> men.</q> We are sinful, and God's thoughts are not as our
thoughts, nor his ways as our ways. Therefore he must make known his thoughts to
us, teach us what we are, what true love is, and what will please him. Shaler, Interpretation
of Nature, 227&mdash;<q>The inculcation of moral truths can be successfully effected
only in the personal way; ... it demands the influence of personality; ... the weight
of the impression depends upon the voice and the eye of a teacher.</q> In other words,
we need not only the exercise of authority, but also the manifestation of love.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Historical proof.&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The knowledge of moral and religious truth
possessed by nations and ages in which special revelation is unknown is
grossly and increasingly imperfect. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Man's actual condition in ante-Christian
times, and in modern heathen lands, is that of extreme moral
depravity. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) With this depravity is found a general conviction of helplessness,
and on the part of some nobler natures, a longing after, and hope
of, aid from above.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Pythagoras: <q>It is not easy to know [duties], except men were taught them by God
himself, or by some person who had received them from God, or obtained the knowledge
of them through some divine means.</q> Socrates: <q>Wait with patience, till we know
with certainty how we ought to behave ourselves toward God and man.</q> Plato: <q>We
will wait for one, be he a God or an inspired man, to instruct us in our duties and to take
away the darkness from our eyes.</q> Disciple of Plato: <q>Make probability our raft,
while we sail through life, unless we could have a more sure and safe conveyance, such
as some divine communication would be.</q> Plato thanked God for three things: first,
that he was born a rational soul; secondly, that he was born a Greek; and, thirdly,
that he lived in the days of Socrates. Yet, with all these advantages, he had only probability
for a raft, on which to navigate strange seas of thought far beyond his depth,
and he longed for <emph><q>a more sure word of prophecy</q> (2 Pet. 1:19)</emph>. See references and quotations
in Peabody, Christianity the Religion of Nature, 35, and in Luthardt, Fundamental
Truths, 156-172, 335-338; Farrar, Seekers after God; Garbett, Dogmatic Faith, 187.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Presumption of supply.</hi> What we know of God, by nature, affords
ground for hope that these wants of our intellectual and moral being will be
met by a corresponding supply, in the shape of a special divine revelation.
We argue this:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) From our necessary conviction of God's wisdom. Having made
man a spiritual being, for spiritual ends, it may be hoped that he will furnish
the means needed to secure these ends. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) From the actual, though incomplete,
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
revelation already given in nature. Since God has actually undertaken
to make himself known to men, we may hope that he will finish the
work he has begun. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) From the general connection of want and supply.
The higher our needs, the more intricate and ingenious are, in general, the
contrivances for meeting them. We may therefore hope that the highest
want will be all the more surely met. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) From analogies of nature and
history. Signs of reparative goodness in nature and of forbearance in providential
dealings lead us to hope that, while justice is executed, God may
still make known some way of restoration for sinners.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) There were two stages in Dr. John Duncan's escape from pantheism: 1. when he
came first to believe in the existence of God, and <q>danced for joy upon the brig o'
Dee</q>; and 2. when, under Malan's influence, he came also to believe that <q>God meant
that we should know him.</q> In the story in the old Village Reader, the mother broke
completely down when she found that her son was likely to grow up stupid, but her
tears conquered him and made him intelligent. Laura Bridgman was blind, deaf and
dumb, and had but small sense of taste or smell. When her mother, after long separation,
went to her in Boston, the mother's heart was in distress lest the daughter should
not recognize her. When at last, by some peculiar mother's sign, she pierced the veil
of insensibility, it was a glad time for both. So God, our Father, tries to reveal himself
to our blind, deaf and dumb souls. The agony of the Cross is the sign of God's distress
over the insensibility of humanity which sin has caused. If he is the Maker of man's
being, he will surely seek to fit it for that communion with himself for which it was
designed.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Gore, Incarnation, 52, 53&mdash;<q>Nature is a first volume, in itself incomplete, and
demanding a second volume, which is Christ.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) R. T. Smith, Man's Knowledge of
Man and of God, 228&mdash;<q>Mendicants do not ply their calling for years in a desert where
there are no givers. Enough of supply has been received to keep the sense of want
alive.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) In the natural arrangements for the healing of bruises in plants and for
the mending of broken bones in the animal creation, in the provision of remedial agents
for the cure of human diseases, and especially in the delay to inflict punishment upon
the transgressor and the space given him for repentance, we have some indications,
which, if uncontradicted by other evidence, might lead us to regard the God of nature
as a God of forbearance and mercy. Plutarch's treatise <q>De Sera Numinis Vindicta</q> is
proof that this thought had occurred to the heathen. It may be doubted, indeed,
whether a heathen religion could even continue to exist, without embracing in it some
element of hope. Yet this very delay in the execution of the divine judgments gave
its own occasion for doubting the existence of a God who was both good and just.
<q>Truth forever on the scaffold, Wrong forever on the throne,</q> is a scandal to the
divine government which only the sacrifice of Christ can fully remove.
</p>

<p>
The problem presents itself also in the Old Testament. In Job 21, and in Psalms, 17, 37, 49,
73, there are partial answers; see <emph>Job 21:7&mdash;<q>Wherefore do the wicked live, Become old, yea, wax mighty
in power?</q></emph> <emph>24:1&mdash;<q>Why are not judgment times determined by the Almighty? And they that know him, why
see they not his days?</q></emph> The New Testament intimates the existence of a witness to God's
goodness among the heathen, while at the same time it declares that the full knowledge
of forgiveness and salvation is brought only by Christ. Compare <emph>Acts 14:17&mdash;<q>And yet he
left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave you from heaven rains and fruitful seasons, filling your
hearts with food and gladness</q></emph>; <emph>17:25-27&mdash;<q>he himself giveth to all life, and breath, and all things; and he made
of one every nation of men ... that they should seek God, if haply they might feel after him and find him</q></emph>; <emph>Rom.
2:4&mdash;<q>the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance</q></emph>; <emph>3:25&mdash;<q>the passing over of the sins done aforetime, in
the forbearance of God</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 3:9&mdash;<q>to make all men see what is the dispensation of the mystery which for ages
hath been hid in God</q></emph>; <emph>2 Tim. 1:10&mdash;<q>our Savior Christ Jesus, who abolished death, and brought life and incorruption
to light through the gospel.</q></emph> See Hackett's edition of the treatise of Plutarch, as also
Bowen, Metaph. and Ethics, 462-487; Diman, Theistic Argument, 371.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We conclude this section upon the reasons <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> for expecting a
revelation from God with the acknowledgment that the facts warrant that
degree of expectation which we call hope, rather than that larger degree
of expectation which we call assurance; and this, for the reason that, while
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
conscience gives proof that God is a God of holiness, we have not, from the
light of nature, equal evidence that God is a God of love. Reason teaches
man that, as a sinner, he merits condemnation; but he cannot, from reason
alone, know that God will have mercy upon him and provide salvation.
His doubts can be removed only by God's own voice, assuring him of
<q>redemption ... the forgiveness of ... trespasses</q> (Eph. 1:7) and
revealing to him the way in which that forgiveness has been rendered possible.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Conscience knows no pardon, and no Savior. Hovey, Manual of Christian Theology, 9,
seems to us to go too far when he says: <q>Even natural affection and conscience afford
some clue to the goodness and holiness of God, though much more is needed by one
who undertakes the study of Christian theology.</q> We grant that natural affection
gives some clue to God's goodness, but we regard conscience as reflecting only God's
holiness and his hatred of sin. We agree with Alexander McLaren: <q>Does God's love
need to be proved? Yes, as all paganism shows. Gods vicious, gods careless, gods cruel,
gods beautiful, there are in abundance; but where is there a god who loves?</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Marks of the Revelation man may expect.</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>As to its substance.</hi> We may expect this later revelation not to contradict,
but to confirm and enlarge, the knowledge of God which we derive
from nature, while it remedies the defects of natural religion and throws
light upon its problems.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Isaiah's appeal is to God's previous communications of truth: <emph>Is. 8:20&mdash;<q>To the law and to
the testimony! if they speak not according to this word, surely there is no morning for them.</q></emph> And Malachi
follows the example of Isaiah; <emph>Mal. 4:4&mdash;<q>Remember ye the law of Moses my servant.</q></emph> Our Lord
himself based his claims upon the former utterances of God: <emph>Luke 24:27&mdash;<q>beginning from
Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>As to its method.</hi> We may expect it to follow God's methods of
procedure in other communications of truth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Bishop Butler (Analogy, part ii, chap. iii) has denied that there is any possibility of
judging <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> how a divine revelation will be given. <q>We are in no sort judges
beforehand,</q> he says, <q>by what methods, or in what proportion, it were to be expected
that this supernatural light and instruction would be afforded us.</q> But Bishop Butler
somewhat later in his great work (part ii, chap. iv) shows that God's progressive plan in
revelation has its analogy in the slow, successive steps by which God accomplishes his
ends in nature. We maintain that the revelation in nature affords certain presumptions
with regard to the revelation of grace, such for example as those mentioned below.
</p>

<p>
Leslie Stephen, in Nineteenth Century, Feb. 1891:180&mdash;<q>Butler answered the argument
of the deists, that the God of Christianity was unjust, by arguing that the God of
nature was equally unjust. James Mill, admitting the analogy, refused to believe in
either God. Dr. Martineau has said, for similar reasons, that Butler <q>wrote one of the
most terrible persuasives to atheism ever produced.</q> So J. H. Newman's <q>kill or cure</q>
argument is essentially that God has either revealed nothing, or has made revelations in
some other places than in the Bible. His argument, like Butler's, may be as good a
persuasive to scepticism as to belief.</q> To this indictment by Leslie Stephen we reply
that it has cogency only so long as we ignore the fact of human sin. Granting this fact,
our world becomes a world of discipline, probation and redemption, and both the God
of nature and the God of Christianity are cleared from all suspicion of injustice. The
analogy between God's methods in the Christian system and his methods in nature
becomes an argument in favor of the former.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That of continuous historical development,&mdash;that it will be given
in germ to early ages, and will be more fully unfolded as the race is prepared
to receive it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Instances of continuous development in God's impartations are found in geological
history; in the growth of the sciences; in the progressive education of the individual
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
and of the race. No other religion but Christianity shows <q>a steady historical progress
of the vision of one infinite Character unfolding itself to man through a period of
many centuries.</q> See sermon by Dr. Temple, on the Education of the World, in Essays
and Reviews; Rogers, Superhuman Origin of the Bible, 374-384; Walker, Philosophy
of the Plan of Salvation. On the gradualness of revelation, see Fisher, Nature and
Method of Revelation, 46-86; Arthur H. Hallam, in John Brown's Rab and his Friends,
282&mdash;<q>Revelation is a gradual approximation of the infinite Being to the ways and
thoughts of finite humanity.</q> A little fire can kindle a city or a world; but ten times
the heat of that little fire, if widely diffused, would not kindle anything.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That of original delivery to a single nation, and to single persons
in that nation, that it may through them be communicated to mankind.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Each nation represents an idea. As the Greek had a genius for liberty and beauty,
and the Roman a genius for organization and law, so the Hebrew nation had a <q>genius
for religion</q> (Renan); this last, however, would have been useless without special
divine aid and superintendence, as witness other productions of this same Semitic race,
such as Bel and the Dragon, in the Old Testament Apocrypha; the gospels of the Apocryphal
New Testament; and later still, the Talmud and the Koran.
</p>

<p>
The O. T. Apocrypha relates that, when Daniel was thrown a second time into the
lions' den, an angel seized Habakkuk in Judea by the hair of his head and carried him
with a bowl of pottage to give to Daniel for his dinner. There were seven lions, and
Daniel was among them seven days and nights. Tobias starts from his father's house
to secure his inheritance, and his little dog goes with him. On the banks of the great
river a great fish threatens to devour him, but he captures and despoils the fish. He
finally returns successful to his father's house, and his little dog goes in with him. In
the Apocryphal Gospels, Jesus carries water in his mantle when his pitcher is broken;
makes clay birds on the Sabbath, and, when rebuked, causes them to fly; strikes a
youthful companion with death, and then curses his accusers with blindness; mocks
his teachers, and resents control. Later Moslem legends declare that Mohammed
caused darkness at noon; whereupon the moon flew to him, went seven times around
the Kaāba, bowed, entered his right sleeve, split into two halves after slipping out at
the left, and the two halves, after retiring to the extreme east and west, were reunited.
These products of the Semitic race show that neither the influence of environment nor
a native genius for religion furnishes an adequate explanation of our Scriptures. As
the flame on Elijah's altar was caused, not by the dead sticks, but by the fire from heaven,
so only the inspiration of the Almighty can explain the unique revelation of the Old
and New Testaments.
</p>

<p>
The Hebrews saw God in conscience. For the most genuine expression of their life
we <q>must look beneath the surface, in the soul, where worship and aspiration and
prophetic faith come face to face with God</q> (Genung, Epic of the Inner Life, 28).
But the Hebrew religion needed to be supplemented by the sight of God in reason, and
in the beauty of the world. The Greeks had the love of knowledge, and the æsthetic
sense. Butcher, Aspects of the Greek Genius, 34&mdash;<q>The Phœnicians taught the Greeks
how to write, but it was the Greeks who wrote.</q> Aristotle was the beginner of science,
and outside the Aryan race none but the Saracens ever felt the scientific impulse.
But the Greek made his problem clear by striking all the unknown quantities out of it.
Greek thought would never have gained universal currency and permanence if it had
not been for Roman jurisprudence and imperialism. England has contributed her
constitutional government, and America her manhood suffrage and her religious freedom.
So a definite thought of God is incorporated in each nation, and each nation has
a message to every other. <emph>Acts 17:26</emph>&mdash;God <emph><q>made of one every nation of men to dwell on all the face of the
earth, having determined their appointed seasons, and the bounds of their habitation</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 3:12&mdash;<q>What advantage
then hath the Jew?... first of all, that they were entrusted with the oracles of God.</q></emph> God's choice
of the Hebrew nation, as the repository and communicator of religious truth, is analogous
to his choice of other nations, as the repositories and communicators of æsthetic,
scientific, governmental truth.
</p>

<p>
Hegel: <q>No nation that has played a weighty and active part in the world's history
has ever issued from the simple development of a single race along the unmodified
lines of blood-relationship. There must be differences, conflicts, a composition of
opposed forces.</q> The conscience of the Hebrew, the thought of the Greek, the organization
of the Latin, the personal loyalty of the Teuton, must all be united to form a
perfect whole. <q>While the Greek church was orthodox, the Latin church was Catholic;
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
while the Greek treated of the two wills in Christ, the Latin treated of the harmony
of our wills with God; while the Latin saved through a corporation, the Teuton
saved through personal faith.</q> Brereton, in Educational Review, Nov. 1901:339&mdash;<q>The
problem of France is that of the religious orders; that of Germany, the construction
of society; that of America, capital and labor.</q> Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 1:183,
184&mdash;<q>Great ideas never come from the masses, but from marked individuals.
These ideas, when propounded, however, awaken an echo in the masses, which shows
that the ideas had been slumbering unconsciously in the souls of others.</q> The hour
strikes, and a Newton appears, who interprets God's will in nature. So the hour
strikes, and a Moses or a Paul appears, who interprets God's will in morals and religion.
The few grains of wheat found in the clasped hand of the Egyptian mummy would
have been utterly lost if one grain had been sown in Europe, a second in Asia, a third
in Africa, and a fourth in America; all being planted together in a flower-pot, and
their product in a garden-bed, and the still later fruit in a farmer's field, there came at
last to be a sufficient crop of new Mediterranean wheat to distribute to all the world.
So God followed his ordinary method in giving religious truth first to a single nation
and to chosen individuals in that nation, that through them it might be given to all
mankind. See British Quarterly, Jan. 1874: art.: Inductive Theology.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That of preservation in written and accessible documents, handed
down from those to whom the revelation is first communicated.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Alphabets, writing, books, are our chief dependence for the history of the past; all
the great religions of the world are book-religions; the Karens expected their teachers
in the new religion to bring to them a book. But notice that false religions have
scriptures, but not Scripture; their sacred books lack the principle of unity which is
furnished by divine inspiration. H. P. Smith, Biblical Scholarship and Inspiration, 68&mdash;<q>Mohammed
discovered that the Scriptures of the Jews were the source of their
religion. He called them a <q>book-people,</q> and endeavored to construct a similar code
for his disciples. In it God is the only speaker; all its contents are made known to the
prophet by direct revelation; its Arabic style is perfect; its text is incorruptible; it is
absolute authority in law, science and history.</q> The Koran is a grotesque human parody
of the Bible; its exaggerated pretensions of divinity, indeed, are the best proof
that it is of purely human origin. Scripture, on the other hand, makes no such claims
for itself, but points to Christ as the sole and final authority. In this sense we may say
with Clarke, Christian Theology, 20&mdash;<q>Christianity is not a book-religion, but a life-religion.
The Bible does not give us Christ, but Christ gives us the Bible.</q> Still it is true
that for our knowledge of Christ we are almost wholly dependent upon Scripture. In
giving his revelation to the world, God has followed his ordinary method of communicating
and preserving truth by means of written documents. Recent investigations,
however, now render it probable that the Karen expectation of a book was the survival
of the teaching of the Nestorian missionaries, who as early as the eighth century
penetrated the remotest parts of Asia, and left in the wall of the city of Singwadu in
Northwestern China a tablet as a monument of their labors. On book-revelation, see
Rogers, Eclipse of Faith, 73-96, 281-304.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>As to its attestation.</hi> We may expect that this revelation will be
accompanied by evidence that its author is the same being whom we have
previously recognized as God of nature. This evidence must constitute (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>)
a manifestation of God himself; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) in the outward as well as the inward
world; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) such as only God's power or knowledge can make; and (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) such
as cannot be counterfeited by the evil, or mistaken by the candid, soul.
In short, we may expect God to attest by miracles and by prophecy, the
divine mission and authority of those to whom he communicates a revelation.
Some such outward sign would seem to be necessary, not only to assure
the original recipient that the supposed revelation is not a vagary of his
own imagination, but also to render the revelation received by a single
individual authoritative to all (compare Judges 6:17, 36-40&mdash;Gideon
asks a sign, for himself; 1 K. 18:36-38&mdash;Elijah asks a sign, for others).
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
But in order that our positive proof of a divine revelation may not be
embarrassed by the suspicion that the miraculous and prophetic elements
in the Scripture history create a presumption against its credibility, it will
be desirable to take up at this point the general subject of miracles and
prophecy.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Miracles, as attesting a Divine Revelation.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Definition of Miracle.</head>

<p>
A. Preliminary Definition.&mdash;A miracle is an event palpable to the
senses, produced for a religious purpose by the immediate agency of God;
an event therefore which, though not contravening any law of nature, the
laws of nature, if fully known, would not without this agency of God be
competent to explain.
</p>

<p>
This definition corrects several erroneous conceptions of the miracle:&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>)
A miracle is not a suspension or violation of natural law; since
natural law is in operation at the time of the miracle just as much as before.
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) A miracle is not a sudden product of natural agencies&mdash;a product
merely foreseen, by him who appears to work it; it is the effect of a will
outside of nature. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) A miracle is not an event without a cause; since
it has for its cause a direct volition of God. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) A miracle is not an
irrational or capricious act of God; but an act of wisdom, performed in
accordance with the immutable laws of his being, so that in the same circumstances
the same course would be again pursued. (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) A miracle is not
contrary to experience; since it is not contrary to experience for a new
cause to be followed by a new effect. (<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) A miracle is not a matter of
internal experience, like regeneration or illumination; but is an event palpable
to the senses, which may serve as an objective proof to all that the
worker of it is divinely commissioned as a religious teacher.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
For various definitions of miracles, see Alexander, Christ and Christianity, 302. On
the whole subject, see Mozley, Miracles; Christlieb, Mod. Doubt and Christ. Belief, 285-339;
Fisher, in Princeton Rev., Nov. 1880, and Jan. 1881; A. H. Strong, Philosophy and
Religion, 129-147, and in Baptist Review, April, 1879. The definition given above is
intended simply as a definition of the miracles of the Bible, or, in other words, of
the events which profess to attest a divine revelation in the Scriptures. The New Testament
designates these events in a two-fold way, viewing them either subjectively,
as producing effects upon men, or objectively, as revealing the power and wisdom of
God. In the former aspect they are called τέρατα, <emph><q>wonders,</q></emph> and σημεῖα, <emph><q>signs,</q> (John 4:48;
Acts 2:22)</emph>. In the latter aspect they are called δυνάμεις, <emph><q>powers,</q></emph> and ἔργα, <emph><q>works,</q> (Mat 7:22;
John 14:11)</emph>. See H. B. Smith, Lect. on Apologetics, 90-116, esp. 94&mdash;<q>σημεῖον, sign,
marking the purpose or object, the moral end, placing the event in connection with
revelation.</q> The Bible Union Version uniformly and properly renders τέρας by <emph><q>wonder,</q></emph>
δυνάμις by <emph><q>miracle,</q></emph> ἔργον by <emph><q>work,</q></emph> and σημεῖον by <emph><q>sign.</q></emph> Goethe, Faust: <q>Alles Vergängliche
ist nur ein Gleichniss: Das Unzulängliche wird hier Ereigniss</q>&mdash;<q>Everything
transitory is but a parable; The unattainable appears as solid fact.</q> So the miracles
of the New Testament are acted parables,&mdash;Christ opens the eyes of the blind to show
that he is the Light of the world, multiplies the loaves to show that he is the Bread of
Life, and raises the dead to show that he lifts men up from the death of trespasses and
sins. See Broadus on Matthew, 175.
</p>

<p>
A modification of this definition of the miracle, however, is demanded by a large class
of Christian physicists, in the supposed interest of natural law. Such a modification is
proposed by Babbage, in the Ninth Bridgewater Treatise, chap. viii. Babbage illustrates
the miracle by the action of his calculating machine, which would present to the
observer in regular succession the series of units from one to ten million, but which
would then make a leap and show, not ten million and one, but a hundred million;
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
Ephraim Peabody illustrates the miracle from the cathedral clock which strikes only
once in a hundred years; yet both these results are due simply to the original construction
of the respective machines. Bonnet held this view; see Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 1:591,
592; Eng. translation, 2:155, 156; so Matthew Arnold, quoted in Bruce, Miraculous
Element in Gospels, 52; see also A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion, 129-147. Babbage
and Peabody would deny that the miracle is due to the direct and immediate agency of
God, and would regard it as belonging to a higher order of nature. God is the author
of the miracle only in the sense that he instituted the laws of nature at the beginning
and provided that at the appropriate time miracle should be their outcome. In favor
of this view it has been claimed that it does not dispense with the divine working, but
only puts it further back at the origination of the system, while it still holds God's
work to be essential, not only to the upholding of the system, but also to the inspiring
of the religious teacher or leader with the knowledge needed to predict the unusual
working of the system. The wonder is confined to the prophecy, which may equally
attest a divine revelation. See Matheson, in Christianity and Evolution, 1-26.
</p>

<p>
But it is plain that a miracle of this sort lacks to a large degree the element of <q>signality</q>
which is needed, if it is to accomplish its purpose. It surrenders the great
advantage which miracle, as first defined, possessed over special providence, as an attestation
of revelation&mdash;the advantage, namely, that while special providence affords <emph>some</emph>
warrant that this revelation comes from God, miracle gives <emph>full</emph> warrant that it comes
from God. Since man may by natural means possess himself of the knowledge of
physical laws, the true miracle which God works, and the pretended miracle which only
man works, are upon this theory far less easy to distinguish from each other: Cortez,
for example, could deceive Montezuma by predicting an eclipse of the sun. Certain
typical miracles, like the resurrection of Lazarus, refuse to be classed as events within
the realm of nature, in the sense in which the term nature is ordinarily used. Our
Lord, moreover, seems clearly to exclude such a theory as this, when he says: <emph><q>If I by
the finger of God cast out demons</q> (Luke 11:20)</emph>; <emph>Mark 1:41&mdash;<q>I will; be thou made clean.</q></emph> The view of
Babbage is inadequate, not only because it fails to recognize any immediate exercise
of <emph>will</emph> in the miracle, but because it regards nature as a mere <emph>machine</emph> which can operate
apart from God&mdash;a purely deistic method of conception. On this view, many of
the products of mere natural law might be called miracles. The miracle would be only
the occasional manifestation of a higher order of nature, like the comet occasionally
invading the solar system. William Elder, Ideas from Nature: <q>The century-plant
which we have seen growing from our childhood may not unfold its blossoms until our
old age comes upon us, but the sudden wonder is natural notwithstanding.</q> If, however,
we interpret nature dynamically, rather than mechanically, and regard it as the
regular working of the divine will instead of the automatic operation of a machine,
there is much in this view which we may adopt. Miracle may be both natural and
supernatural. We may hold, with Babbage, that it has natural antecedents, while at
the same time we hold that it is produced by the immediate agency of God. We proceed
therefore to an alternative and preferable definition, which in our judgment
combines the merits of both that have been mentioned. On miracles as already
defined, see Mozley, Miracles, preface, ix-xxvi, 7, 143-166; Bushnell, Nature and Supernatural,
333-336; Smith's and Hastings' Dict. of Bible, art.: Miracles; Abp. Temple,
Bampton Lectures for 1884:193-221; Shedd, Dogm. Theology, 1:541, 542.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Alternative and Preferable Definition.&mdash;A miracle is an event in
nature, so extraordinary in itself and so coinciding with the prophecy or
command of a religious teacher or leader, as fully to warrant the conviction,
on the part of those who witness it, that God has wrought it with
the design of certifying that this teacher or leader has been commissioned
by him.
</p>

<p>
This definition has certain marked advantages as compared with the preliminary
definition given above:&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It recognizes the immanence of
God and his immediate agency in nature, instead of assuming an antithesis
between the laws of nature and the will of God. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It regards the miracle
as simply an extraordinary act of that same God who is already present
in all natural operations and who in them is revealing his general plan.
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It holds that natural law, as the method of God's regular activity, in
no way precludes unique exertions of his power when these will best secure
his purpose in creation. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) It leaves it possible that all miracles may
have their natural explanations and may hereafter be traced to natural
causes, while both miracles and their natural causes may be only names
for the one and self-same will of God. (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) It reconciles the claims of
both science and religion: of science, by permitting any possible or probable
physical antecedents of the miracle; of religion, by maintaining that
these very antecedents together with the miracle itself are to be interpreted
as signs of God's special commission to him under whose teaching or
leadership the miracle is wrought.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Augustine, who declares that <q>Dei voluntas rerum natura est,</q> defines the miracle
in De Civitate Dei, 21:8&mdash;<q>Portentum ergo fit non contra naturam, sed contra quam
est nota natura.</q> He says also that a birth is more miraculous than a resurrection,
because it is more wonderful that something that never was should begin to be, than
that something that was and ceased to be should begin again. E. G. Robinson, Christ.
Theology, 104&mdash;<q>The natural is God's work. He originated it. There is no separation
between the natural and the supernatural. The natural is supernatural. God works
in everything. Every end, even though attained by mechanical means, is God's end
as truly as if he wrought by miracle.</q> Shaler, Interpretation of Nature, 141, regards
miracle as something exceptional, yet under the control of natural law; the latent in
nature suddenly manifesting itself; the revolution resulting from the slow accumulation
of natural forces. In the Windsor Hotel fire, the heated and charred woodwork
suddenly burst into flame. Flame is very different from mere heat, but it may be the
result of a regularly rising temperature. Nature may be God's regular action, miracle
its unique result. God's regular action may be entirely free, and yet its extraordinary
result may be entirely natural. With these qualifications and explanations, we may
adopt the statement of Biedermann, Dogmatik, 581-591&mdash;<q>Everything is miracle,&mdash;therefore
faith sees God everywhere; Nothing is miracle,&mdash;therefore science sees God
nowhere.</q>
</p>

<p>
Miracles are never considered by the Scripture writers as infractions of law. Bp.
Southampton, Place of Miracles, 18&mdash;<q>The Hebrew historian or prophet regarded miracles
as only the emergence into sensible experience of that divine force which was all
along, though invisibly, controlling the course of nature.</q> Hastings, Bible Dictionary,
4:117&mdash;<q>The force of a miracle to us, arising from our notion of law, would not be felt
by a Hebrew, because he had no notion of natural law.</q> <emph>Ps. 77:19, 20&mdash;<q>Thy way was in the
sea, And thy paths in the great waters, And thy footsteps were not known</q></emph>&mdash;They knew not, and we
know not, by what precise means the deliverance was wrought, or by what precise track
the passage through the Red Sea was effected; all we know is that <emph><q>Thou leddest thy people
like a flock, By the hand of Moses and Aaron.</q></emph> J. M. Whiton, Miracles and Supernatural Religion:
<q>The supernatural is in nature itself, at its very heart, at its very life; ... not an
outside power interfering with the course of nature, but an inside power vitalizing
nature and operating through it.</q> Griffith-Jones, Ascent through Christ, 35&mdash;<q>Miracle,
instead of spelling <q>monster</q>, as Emerson said, simply bears witness to some
otherwise unknown or unrecognized aspect of the divine character.</q> Shedd, Dogm.
Theol., 1:533&mdash;<q>To cause the sun to rise and to cause Lazarus to rise, both demand
omnipotence; but the manner in which omnipotence works in one instance is unlike
the manner in the other.</q>
</p>

<p>
Miracle is an immediate operation of God; but, since all natural processes are also
immediate operations of God, we do not need to deny the use of these natural processes,
so far as they will go, in miracle. Such wonders of the Old Testament as the
overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, the partings of the Red Sea and of the Jordan, the
calling down of fire from heaven by Elijah and the destruction of the army of Sennacherib,
are none the less works of God when regarded as wrought by the use of natural
means. In the New Testament Christ took water to make wine, and took the five
loaves to make bread, just as in ten thousand vineyards to-day he is turning the moisture
of the earth into the juice of the grape, and in ten thousand fields is turning carbon
into corn. The virgin-birth of Christ may be an extreme instance of parthenogenesis,
which Professor Loeb of Chicago has just demonstrated to take place in other than the
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
lowest forms of life and which he believes to be possible in all. Christ's resurrection
may be an illustration of the power of the normal and perfect human spirit to take to
itself a proper body, and so may be the type and prophecy of that great change when
we too shall lay down our life and take it again. The scientist may yet find that his
disbelief is not only disbelief in Christ, but also disbelief in science. All miracle may
have its natural side, though we now are not able to discern it; and, if this were true,
the Christian argument would not one whit be weakened, for still miracle would evidence
the extraordinary working of the immanent God, and the impartation of his knowledge
to the prophet or apostle who was his instrument.
</p>

<p>
This view of the miracle renders entirely unnecessary and irrational the treatment
accorded to the Scripture narratives by some modern theologians. There is a credulity
of scepticism, which minimizes the miraculous element in the Bible and treats it as
mythical or legendary, in spite of clear evidence that it belongs to the realm of actual
history. Pfleiderer, Philos. Relig., 1:295&mdash;<q>Miraculous legends arise in two ways,
partly out of the idealizing of the real, and partly out of the realizing of the ideal....
Every occurrence may obtain for the religious judgment the significance of a sign
or proof of the world-governing power, wisdom, justice or goodness of God....
Miraculous histories are a poetic realizing of religious ideas.</q> Pfleiderer quotes Goethe's
apothegm: <q>Miracle is faith's dearest child.</q> Foster, Finality of the Christian Religion,
128-138&mdash;<q>We most honor biblical miraculous narratives when we seek to understand
them as poesies.</q> Ritschl defines miracles as <q>those striking <hi rend='italic'>natural</hi> occurrences
with which the experience of God's special help is connected.</q> He leaves doubtful the
bodily resurrection of Christ, and many of his school deny it; see Mead, Ritschl's Place
in the History of Doctrine, 11. We do not need to interpret Christ's resurrection as a
mere appearance of his spirit to the disciples. Gladden, Seven Puzzling Books, 202&mdash;<q>In
the hands of perfect and spiritual man, the forces of nature are pliant and tractable
as they are not in ours. The resurrection of Christ is only a sign of the superiority
of the life of the perfect spirit over external conditions. It may be perfectly in
accordance with nature.</q> Myers, Human Personality, 2:288&mdash;<q>I predict that, in consequence
of the new evidence, all reasonable men, a century hence, will believe the
resurrection of Christ.</q> We may add that Jesus himself intimates that the working of
miracles is hereafter to be a common and natural manifestation of the new life which
he imparts: <emph>John 14:12&mdash;<q>He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works
than these shall he do, because I go unto the Father.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
We append a number of opinions, ancient and modern, with regard to miracles, all
tending to show the need of so defining them as not to conflict with the just claims of
science. Aristotle: <q>Nature is not full of episodes, like a bad tragedy.</q> Shakespeare,
All's Well that Ends Well, 2:3:1&mdash;<q>They say miracles are past; and we have our
philosophical persons to make modern and familiar things supernatural and causeless.
Hence it is that we make trifles of terrors, ensconsing ourselves into seeming knowledge,
when we should submit ourselves to an unknown fear.</q> Keats, Lamia: <q>There
was an awful rainbow once in heaven; We know her woof, her texture: she is given In
the dull catalogue of common things.</q> Hill, Genetic Philosophy, 334&mdash;<q>Biological and
psychological science unite in affirming that every event, organic or psychic, is to be
explained in the terms of its immediate antecedents, and that it can be so explained.
There is therefore no necessity, there is even no room, for interference. If the existence
of a Deity depends upon the evidence of intervention and supernatural agency,
faith in the divine seems to be destroyed in the scientific mind.</q> Theodore Parker:
<q>No whim in God,&mdash;therefore no miracle in nature.</q> Armour, Atonement and Law,
15-33&mdash;<q>The miracle of redemption, like all miracles, is by intervention of adequate
power, not by suspension of law. Redemption is not <q>the great exception.</q> It is the
fullest revelation and vindication of law.</q> Gore, in Lux Mundi, 320&mdash;<q>Redemption is
not natural but supernatural&mdash;supernatural, that is, in view of the false nature which
man made for himself by excluding God. Otherwise, the work of redemption is only
the reconstitution of the nature which God had designed.</q> Abp. Trench: <q>The world
of nature is throughout a witness for the world of spirit, proceeding from the same
hand, growing out of the same root, and being constituted for this very end. The
characters of nature which everywhere meet the eye are not a common but a sacred
writing,&mdash;they are the hieroglyphics of God.</q> Pascal: <q>Nature is the image of grace.</q>
President Mark Hopkins: <q>Christianity and perfect Reason are identical.</q> See Mead,
Supernatural Revelation, 97-123; art.: Miracle, by Bernard, in Hastings' Dictionary of
the Bible. The modern and improved view of the miracle is perhaps best presented by
T. H. Wright, The Finger of God; and by W. N. Rice, Christian Faith in an Age of
Science, 336.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Possibility of Miracle.</head>

<p>
An event in nature may be caused by an agent in nature yet above
nature. This is evident from the following considerations:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Lower forces and laws in nature are frequently counteracted and
transcended by the higher (as mechanical forces and laws by chemical, and
chemical by vital), while yet the lower forces and laws are not suspended
or annihilated, but are merged in the higher, and made to assist in accomplishing
purposes to which they are altogether unequal when left to themselves.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
By nature we mean nature in the proper sense&mdash;not <q>everything that is not God,</q> but
<q>everything that is not God or made in the image of God</q>; see Hopkins, Outline Study
of Man, 258, 259. Man's will does not belong to nature, but is above nature. On the
transcending of lower forces by higher, see Murphy, Habit and Intelligence, 1:88.
James Robertson, Early Religion of Israel, 23&mdash;<q>Is it impossible that there should be
unique things in the world? Is it scientific to assert that there are not?</q> Ladd, Philosophy
of Knowledge, 406&mdash;<q>Why does not the projecting part of the coping-stone fall,
in obedience to the law of gravitation, from the top of yonder building? Because, as
physics declares, the forces of cohesion, acting under quite different laws, thwart and
oppose for the time being the law of gravitation.... But now, after a frosty
night, the coping-stone actually breaks off and tumbles to the ground; for that unique
law which makes water forcibly expand at 32° Fahrenheit has contradicted the laws of
cohesion and has restored to the law of gravitation its temporarily suspended rights
over this mass of matter.</q> Gore, Incarnation, 48&mdash;<q>Evolution views nature as a progressive
order in which there are new departures, fresh levels won, phenomena
unknown before. When organic life appeared, the future did not resemble the past.
So when man came. Christ is a new nature&mdash;the creative Word made flesh. It is to be
expected that, as new nature, he will exhibit new phenomena. New vital energy will
radiate from him, controlling the material forces. Miracles are the proper accompaniments
of his person.</q> We may add that, as Christ is the immanent God, he is present
in nature while at the same time he is above nature, and he whose steady will is the
essence of all natural law can transcend all past exertions of that will. The infinite
One is not a being of endless monotony. William Elder, Ideas from Nature, 156&mdash;<q>God
is not bound hopelessly to his process, like Ixion to his wheel.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The human will acts upon its physical organism, and so upon nature,
and produces results which nature left to herself never could accomplish,
while yet no law of nature is suspended or violated. Gravitation still operates
upon the axe, even while man holds it at the surface of the water&mdash;for
the axe still has weight (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> 2 K. 6:5-7).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Versus</hi> Hume, Philos. Works, 4:130&mdash;<q>A miracle is a violation of the laws of nature.</q>
Christian apologists have too often needlessly embarrassed their argument by accepting
Hume's definition. The stigma is entirely undeserved. If man can support the axe
at the surface of the water while gravitation still acts upon it, God can certainly, at
the prophet's word, make the iron to swim, while gravitation still acts upon it. But this
last is miracle. See Mansel, Essay on Miracles, in Aids to Faith, 26, 27: After the
greatest wave of the season has landed its pebble high up on the beach, I can move the
pebble a foot further without altering the force of wind or wave or climate in a distant
continent. Fisher, Supernat. Origin of Christianity, 471; Hamilton, Autology, 685-690;
Bowen, Metaph. and Ethics, 445; Row, Bampton Lectures on Christian Evidences, 54-74;
A. A. Hodge: Pulling out a new stop of the organ does not suspend the working or
destroy the harmony of the other stops. The pump does not suspend the law of
gravitation, nor does our throwing a ball into the air. If gravitation did not act, the
upward velocity of the ball would not diminish and the ball would never return.
<q>Gravitation draws iron down. But the magnet overcomes that attraction and draws
the iron up. Yet here is no suspension or violation of law, but rather a harmonious
working of two laws, each in its sphere. Death and not life is the order of nature. But
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
men live notwithstanding. Life is supernatural. Only as a force additional to mere
nature works against nature does life exist. So spiritual life uses and transcends the
laws of nature</q> (Sunday School Times). Gladden, What Is Left? 60&mdash;<q>Wherever
you find thought, choice, love, you find something that is not under the dominion of
fixed law. These are the attributes of a free personality.</q> William James: <q>We need
to substitute the <emph>personal</emph> view of life for the <emph>impersonal</emph> and <emph>mechanical</emph> view. Mechanical
rationalism is narrowness and partial induction of facts,&mdash;it is not <emph>science</emph>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) In all free causation, there is an acting without means. Man acts
upon external nature through his physical organism, but, in moving his
physical organism, he acts directly upon matter. In other words, the
human will can <emph>use</emph> means, only because it has the power of acting initially
<emph>without</emph> means.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See Hopkins, on Prayer-gauge, 10, and in Princeton Review, Sept. 1882:188. A. J.
Balfour, Foundations of Belief, 311&mdash;<q>Not Divinity alone intervenes in the world of
things. Each living soul, in its measure and degree, does the same.</q> Each soul that
acts in any way on its surroundings does so on the principle of the miracle. Phillips
Brooks, Life, 2:350&mdash;<q>The making of all events miraculous is no more an abolition of
miracle than the flooding of the world with sunshine is an extinction of the sun.</q>
George Adam Smith, on <emph>Is. 33:14&mdash;<q>devouring fire ... everlasting burnings</q></emph>: <q>If we look
at a conflagration through smoked glass, we see buildings collapsing, but we see no
fire. So science sees results, but not the power which produces them; sees cause and
effect, but does not see God.</q> P. S. Henson: <q>The current in an electric wire is invisible
so long as it circulates uniformly. But cut the wire and insert a piece of carbon
between the two broken ends, and at once you have an arc-light that drives away the
darkness. So miracle is only the momentary interruption in the operation of uniform
laws, which thus gives light to the ages,</q>&mdash;or, let us say rather, the momentary change
in the method of their operation whereby the will of God takes a new form of manifestation.
Pfleiderer, Grundriss, 100&mdash;<q>Spinoza leugnete ihre metaphysische Möglichkeit,
Hume ihre geschichtliche Erkennbarkeit, Kant ihre practische Brauchbarkeit,
Schleiermacher ihre religiöse Bedeutsamkeit, Hegel ihre geistige Beweiskraft, Fichte
ihre wahre Christlichkeit, und die kritische Theologie ihre wahre Geschichtlichkeit.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) What the human will, considered as a supernatural force, and what
the chemical and vital forces of nature itself, are demonstrably able to
accomplish, cannot be regarded as beyond the power of God, so long as
God dwells in and controls the universe. If man's will can act directly
upon matter in his own physical organism, God's will can work immediately
upon the system which he has created and which he sustains. In
other words, if there be a God, and if he be a personal being, miracles are
possible. The impossibility of miracles can be maintained only upon principles
of atheism or pantheism.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See Westcott, Gospel of the Resurrection, 19; Cox, Miracles, an Argument and a
Challenge: <q>Anthropomorphism is preferable to hylomorphism.</q> Newman Smyth,
Old Faiths in a New Light, ch. 1&mdash;<q>A miracle is not a sudden blow struck in the face
of nature, but a use of nature, according to its inherent capacities, by higher powers.</q>
See also Gloatz, Wunder und Naturgesetz, in Studien und Kritiken, 1886:403-546; Gunsaulus,
Transfiguration of Christ, 18, 19, 26; Andover Review, on <q>Robert Elsmere,</q>
1888:303; W. E. Gladstone, in Nineteenth Century, 1888:766-788; Dubois, on Science and
Miracle, in New Englander, July, 1889:1-32&mdash;Three postulates: (1) Every particle
attracts every other in the universe; (2) Man's will is free; (3) Every volition is accompanied
by corresponding brain-action. Hence every volition of ours causes changes
throughout the whole universe; also, in Century Magazine, Dec. 1894:229&mdash;Conditions
are never twice the same in nature; all things are the results of will, since we know
that the least thought of ours shakes the universe; miracle is simply the action of will
in unique conditions; the beginning of life, the origin of consciousness, these are miracles,
yet they are strictly natural; prayer and the mind that frames it are conditions
which <emph>the Mind</emph> in nature cannot ignore. <emph><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Ps. 115:3&mdash;<q>our God is in the heavens: He hath done
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
whatsoever he pleased</q></emph> = his almighty power and freedom do away with all <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> objections
to miracles. If God is not a mere <emph>force</emph>, but a <emph>person</emph>, then miracles are possible.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) This possibility of miracles becomes doubly sure to those who see
in Christ none other than the immanent God manifested to creatures. The
Logos or divine Reason who is the principle of all growth and evolution
can make God known only by means of successive new impartations of his
energy. Since all progress implies increment, and Christ is the only
source of life, the whole history of creation is a witness to the possibility
of miracle.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 163-166&mdash;<q rend='pre'>This conception of evolution is that
of Lotze. That great philosopher, whose influence is more potent than any other in
present thought, does not regard the universe as a <emph>plenum</emph> to which nothing can be
added in the way of force. He looks upon the universe rather as a plastic organism to
which new impulses can be imparted from him of whose thought and will it is an
expression. These impulses, once imparted, abide in the organism and are thereafter
subject to its law. Though these impulses come from within, they come not from the
finite mechanism but from the immanent God. Robert Browning's phrase, <q>All's love,
but all's law,</q> must be interpreted as meaning that the very movements of the planets
and all the operations of nature are revelations of a personal and present God, but it
must not be interpreted as meaning that God runs in a rut, that he is confined to mechanism,
that he is incapable of unique and startling manifestations of power.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The idea that gives to evolution its hold upon thinking minds is the idea of continuity.
But absolute continuity is inconsistent with progress. If the future is not simply
a reproduction of the past, there must be some new cause of change. In order to
progress there must be either a new force, or a new combination of forces, and the
new combination of forces can be explained only by some new force that causes the
combination. This new force, moreover, must be intelligent force, if the evolution is
to be toward the better instead of toward the worse. The continuity must be continuity
not of forces but of plan. The forces may increase, nay, they must increase, unless
the new is to be a mere repetition of the old. There must be additional energy
imparted, the new combination brought about, and all this implies purpose and will.
But through all there runs one continuous plan, and upon this plan the rationality of
evolution depends.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>A man builds a house. In laying the foundation he uses stone and mortar, but he
makes the walls of wood and the roof of tin. In the superstructure he brings into
play different laws from those which apply to the foundation. There is continuity,
not of material, but of plan. Progress from cellar to garret requires breaks here and
there, and the bringing in of new forces; in fact, without the bringing in of these new
forces the evolution of the house would be impossible. Now substitute for the foundation
and superstructure living things like the chrysalis and the butterfly; imagine
the power to work from within and not from without; and you see that true continuity
does not exclude but involves new beginnings.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Evolution, then, depends on increments of force <hi rend='italic'>plus</hi> continuity of plan. New creations
are possible because the immanent God has not exhausted himself. Miracle is
possible because God is not far away, but is at hand to do whatever the needs of his
moral universe may require. Regeneration and answers to prayer are possible for the
very reason that these are the objects for which the universe was built. If we were
deists, believing in a distant God and a mechanical universe, evolution and Christianity
would be irreconcilable. But since we believe in a dynamical universe, of which
the personal and living God is the inner source of energy, evolution is but the basis,
foundation and background of Christianity, the silent and regular working of him
who, in the fulness of time, utters his voice in Christ and the Cross.</q>
</p>

<p>
Lotze's own statement of his position may be found in his Microcosmos, 2:479 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Professor James Ten Broeke has interpreted him as follows: <q>He makes the possibility
of the miracle depend upon the close and intimate action and reaction between the
world and the personal Absolute, in consequence of which the movements of the natural
world are carried on only <emph>through</emph> the Absolute, with the possibility of a variation
in the general course of things, according to existing facts and the purpose of the
divine Governor.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. Probability of Miracles.</head>

<p>
A. We acknowledge that, so long as we confine our attention to nature,
there is a presumption against miracles. Experience testifies to the uniformity
of natural law. A general uniformity is needful, in order to make
possible a rational calculation of the future, and a proper ordering of life.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See Butler, Analogy, part ii, chap. ii; F. W. Farrar, Witness of History to Christ, 3-45;
Modern Scepticism, 1:179-227; Chalmers, Christian Revelation, 1:47. G. D. B. Pepper:
<q>Where there is no law, no settled order, there can be no miracle. The miracle
presupposes the law, and the importance assigned to miracles is the recognition of the
reign of law. But the making and launching of a ship may be governed by law, no less
than the sailing of the ship after it is launched. So the introduction of a higher spiritual
order into a merely natural order constitutes a new and unique event.</q> Some
Christian apologists have erred in affirming that the miracle was antecedently as probable
as any other event, whereas only its antecedent improbability gives it value as a
proof of revelation. Horace: <q>Nec deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus Inciderit.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. But we deny that this uniformity of nature is absolute and universal.
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It is not a truth of reason that can have no exceptions, like the
axiom that a whole is greater than its parts. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Experience could not
warrant a belief in absolute and universal uniformity, unless experience
were identical with absolute and universal knowledge. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) We know, on
the contrary, from geology, that there have been breaks in this uniformity,
such as the introduction of vegetable, animal and human life, which cannot
be accounted for, except by the manifestation in nature of a supernatural
power.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Compare the probability that the sun will rise to-morrow morning with the certainty
that two and two make four. Huxley, Lay Sermons, 158, indignantly denies that
there is any <q>must</q> about the uniformity of nature: <q>No one is entitled to say <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign>
that any given so-called miraculous event is impossible.</q> Ward, Naturalism and
Agnosticism, 1:84&mdash;<q>There is no evidence for the statement that the mass of the universe
is a definite and unchangeable quantity</q>; 108, 109&mdash;<q>Why so confidently assume
that a rigid and monotonous uniformity is the only, or the highest, indication of order,
the order of an ever living Spirit, above all? How is it that we depreciate machine-made
articles, and prefer those in which the artistic impulse, or the fitness of the individual
case, is free to shape and to make what is literally manufactured, hand-made?...
Dangerous as teleological arguments in general may be, we may at least safely
say the world was not designed to make science easy.... To call the verses of a
poet, the politics of a statesman, or the award of a judge mechanical, implies, as Lotze
has pointed out, marked disparagement, although it implies, too, precisely those characteristics&mdash;exactness
and invariability&mdash;in which Maxwell would have us see a token
of the divine.</q> Surely then we must not insist that divine wisdom must always run in
a rut, must ever repeat itself, must never exhibit itself in unique acts like incarnation
and resurrection. See Edward Hitchcock, in Bib. Sac., 20:489-561, on <q>The Law
of Nature's Constancy Subordinate to the Higher Law of Change</q>; Jevons, Principles
of Science, 2:430-438; Mozley, Miracles, 26.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) S. T. Coleridge, Table Talk, 18 December, 1831&mdash;<q>The light which experience
gives us is a lantern on the stern of the ship, which shines only on the waves behind
us.</q> Hobbes: <q>Experience concludeth nothing universally.</q> Brooks, Foundations
of Zoölogy, 131&mdash;<q>Evidence can tell us only what has happened, and it can never
assure us that the future <emph>must</emph> be like the past; 132&mdash;Proof that all nature is mechanical
would not be inconsistent with the belief that everything in nature is immediately
sustained by Providence, and that my volition counts for something in determining
the course of events.</q> Royce, World and Individual, 2:204&mdash;<q>Uniformity is not absolute.
Nature is a vaster realm of life and meaning, of which we men form a part, and
of which the final unity is in God's life. The rhythm of the heart-beat has its normal
regularity, yet its limited persistence. Nature may be merely the <emph>habits of free will</emph>.
Every region of this universally conscious world may be a centre whence issues new
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
conscious life for communication to all the worlds.</q> Principal Fairbairn: <q>Nature is
Spirit.</q> We prefer to say: <q>Nature is the manifestation of spirit, the regularities of
freedom.</q>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Other breaks in the uniformity of nature are the coming of Christ and the regeneration
of a human soul. Harnack, What is Christianity, 18, holds that though there
are no interruptions to the working of natural law, natural law is not yet fully known.
While there are no miracles, there is plenty of the miraculous. The power of mind over
matter is beyond our present conceptions. Bowne, Philosophy of Theism, 210&mdash;The
effects are no more consequences of the laws than the laws are consequences of the
effects = both laws and effects are exercises of divine will. King, Reconstruction in
Theology, 56&mdash;We must hold, not to the <emph>uniformity</emph> of law, but to the <emph>universality</emph> of law;
for evolution has successive stages with new laws coming in and becoming dominant
that had not before appeared. The new and higher stage is practically a miracle from
the point of view of the lower. See British Quarterly Review, Oct. 1881:154; Martineau,
Study, 2:200, 203, 209.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. Since the inworking of the moral law into the constitution and
course of nature shows that nature exists, not for itself, but for the contemplation
and use of moral beings, it is probable that the God of nature
will produce effects aside from those of natural law, whenever there are
sufficiently important moral ends to be served thereby.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Beneath the expectation of uniformity is the intuition of final cause; the former
may therefore give way to the latter. See Porter, Human Intellect, 592-615&mdash;Efficient
causes and final causes may conflict, and then the efficient give place to the final. This
is miracle. See Hutton, in Nineteenth Century, Aug. 1885, and Channing, Evidences of
Revealed Religion, quoted in Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:534, 535&mdash;<q>The order of the universe
is a means, not an end, and like all other means must give way when the end can
be best promoted without it. It is the mark of a weak mind to make an idol of order
and method; to cling to established forms of business when they clog instead of advancing
it.</q> Balfour, Foundations of Belief, 357&mdash;<q>The stability of the heavens is in the
sight of God of less importance than the moral growth of the human spirit.</q> This is
proved by the Incarnation. The Christian sees in this little earth the scene of God's
greatest revelation. The superiority of the spiritual to the physical helps us to see our
true dignity in the creation, to rule our bodies, to overcome our sins. Christ's suffering
shows us that God is no indifferent spectator of human pain. He subjects himself
to our conditions, or rather in this subjection reveals to us God's own eternal suffering
for sin. The atonement enables us to solve the problem of sin.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
D. The existence of moral disorder consequent upon the free acts of
man's will, therefore, changes the presumption against miracles into a presumption
in their favor. The non-appearance of miracles, in this case,
would be the greatest of wonders.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Stearns, Evidence of Christian Experience, 331-335&mdash;So a man's personal consciousness
of sin, and above all his personal experience of regenerating grace, will constitute
the best preparation for the study of miracles. <q>Christianity cannot be proved except
to a bad conscience.</q> The dying Vinet said well: <q>The greatest miracle that I know of
is that of my conversion. I was dead, and I live; I was blind, and I see; I was a slave,
and I am free; I was an enemy of God, and I love him; prayer, the Bible, the society of
Christians, these were to me a source of profound <emph>ennui</emph>; whilst now it is the pleasures
of the world that are wearisome to me, and piety is the source of all my joy. Behold
the miracle! And if God has been able to work that one, there are none of which he is
not capable.</q>
</p>

<p>
Yet the physical and the moral are not <q>sundered as with an axe.</q> Nature is but the
lower stage or imperfect form of the revelation of God's truth and holiness and love.
It prepares the way for the miracle by suggesting, though more dimly, the same
essential characteristics of the divine nature. Ignorance and sin necessitate a larger
disclosure. G. S. Lee, The Shadow Christ, 84&mdash;<q>The pillar of cloud was the dim night-lamp
that Jehovah kept burning over his infant children, to show them that he was there.
They did not know that the night itself was God.</q> Why do we have Christmas presents
in Christian homes? Because the parents do not love their children at other times?
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
No; but because the mind becomes sluggish in the presence of merely regular kindness,
and special gifts are needed to wake it to gratitude. So our sluggish and unloving
minds need special testimonies of the divine mercy. Shall God alone be shut up to
dull uniformities of action? Shall the heavenly Father alone be unable to make special
communications of love? Why then are not miracles and revivals of religion constant
and uniform? Because uniform blessings would be regarded simply as workings of a
machine. See Mozley, Miracles, preface, xxiv; Turner, Wish and Will, 291-315; N. W.
Taylor, Moral Government, 2:388-423.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
E. As belief in the possibility of miracles rests upon our belief in the
existence of a personal God, so belief in the probability of miracles rests
upon our belief that God is a moral and benevolent being. He who has
no God but a God of physical order will regard miracles as an impertinent
intrusion upon that order. But he who yields to the testimony of conscience
and regards God as a God of holiness, will see that man's unholiness
renders God's miraculous interposition most necessary to man and
most becoming to God. Our view of miracles will therefore be determined
by our belief in a moral, or in a non-moral, God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Philo, in his Life of Moses, 1:88, speaking of the miracles of the quails and of the
water from the rock, says that <q>all these unexpected and extraordinary things are
amusements or playthings of God.</q> He believes that there is room for arbitrariness
in the divine procedure. Scripture however represents miracle as an extraordinary,
rather than as an arbitrary, act. It is <emph><q>his work, his strange work ... his act, his strange act</q>
(Is. 28:21)</emph>. God's ordinary method is that of regular growth and development. Chadwick,
Unitarianism, 72&mdash;<q>Nature is economical. If she wants an apple, she develops a
leaf; if she wants a brain, she develops a vertebra. We always thought well of backbone;
and, if Goethe's was a sound suggestion, we think better of it now.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is commonly, but very erroneously, taken for granted that miracle requires a
greater exercise of power than does God's upholding of the ordinary processes of
nature. But to an omnipotent Being our measures of power have no application. The
question is not a question of power, but of rationality and love. Miracle implies self-restraint,
as well as self-unfolding, on the part of him who works it. It is therefore
not God's common method of action; it is adopted only when regular methods will not
suffice; it often seems accompanied by a sacrifice of feeling on the part of Christ <emph>Mat.
17:17&mdash;<q>O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I bear with you?
bring him hither to me</q></emph>; <emph>Mark 7:34&mdash;<q>looking up to heaven, he sighed, and saith unto him, Ephphatha, that is,
Be opened</q></emph>; <emph><hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Mat. 12:39&mdash;<q>An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign
be given to it but the sign of Jonah the prophet.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
F. From the point of view of ethical monism the probability of miracle
becomes even greater. Since God is not merely the intellectual but the
moral Reason of the world, the disturbances of the world-order which are
due to sin are the matters which most deeply affect him. Christ, the life of
the whole system and of humanity as well, must suffer; and, since we have
evidence that he is merciful as well as just, it is probable that he will rectify
the evil by extraordinary means, when merely ordinary means do not
avail.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Like creation and providence, like inspiration and regeneration, miracle is a work in
which God limits himself, by a new and peculiar exercise of his power,&mdash;limits himself
as part of a process of condescending love and as a means of teaching sense-environed
and sin-burdened humanity what it would not learn in any other way. Self-limitation,
however, is the very perfection and glory of God, for without it no self-sacrificing love
would be possible (see page 9, F.). The probability of miracles is therefore argued not
only from God's holiness but also from his love. His desire to save men from their
sins must be as infinite as his nature. The incarnation, the atonement, the resurrection,
when once made known to us, commend themselves, not only as satisfying our human
needs, but as worthy of a God of moral perfection.
</p>

<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>

<p>
An argument for the probability of the miracle might be drawn from the concessions
of one of its chief modern opponents, Thomas H. Huxley. He tells us in different
places that the object of science is <q>the discovery of the rational order that pervades the
universe,</q> which in spite of his professed agnosticism is an unconscious testimony to
Reason and Will at the basis of all things. He tells us again that there is no necessity in
the uniformities of nature: <q>When we change <q>will</q> into <q>must,</q> we introduce an idea
of necessity which has no warrant in the observed facts, and has no warranty that I
can discover elsewhere.</q> He speaks of <q>the infinite wickedness that has attended the
course of human history.</q> Yet he has no hope in man's power to save himself: <q>I would
as soon adore a wilderness of apes,</q> as the Pantheist's rationalized conception of
humanity. He grants that Jesus Christ is <q>the noblest ideal of humanity which mankind
has yet worshiped.</q> Why should he not go further and concede that Jesus Christ most
truly represents the infinite Reason at the heart of things, and that his purity and love,
demonstrated by suffering and death, make it probable that God will use extraordinary
means for man's deliverance? It is doubtful whether Huxley recognized his
own personal sinfulness as fully as he recognized the sinfulness of humanity in general.
If he had done so, he would have been willing to accept miracle upon even a slight preponderance
of historical proof. As a matter of fact, he rejected miracle upon the
grounds assigned by Hume, which we now proceed to mention.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>4. Amount of Testimony necessary to prove a Miracle.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The amount of testimony necessary to prove a miracle</hi> is no
greater than that which is requisite to prove the occurrence of any other
unusual but confessedly possible event.
</p>

<p>
Hume, indeed, argued that a miracle is so contradictory of all human
experience that it is more reasonable to believe any amount of testimony
false than to believe a miracle to be true.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The original form of the argument can be found in Hume's Philosophical Works, 4:124-150.
See also Bib. Sac., Oct. 1867:615. For the most recent and plausible statement
of it, see Supernatural Religion, 1:55-94. The argument maintains for substance
that things are impossible because improbable. It ridicules the credulity of those who
<q>thrust their fists against the posts, And still insist they see the ghosts,</q> and holds with
the German philosopher who declared that he would not believe in a miracle, even if
he saw one with his own eyes. Christianity is so miraculous that it takes a miracle to
make one believe it.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The argument is fallacious, because
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It is chargeable with a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>petitio principii</foreign>, in making our own personal
experience the measure of all human experience. The same principle
would make the proof of any absolutely new fact impossible. Even though
God should work a miracle, he could never prove it.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It involves a self-contradiction, since it seeks to overthrow our faith
in human testimony by adducing to the contrary the general experience of
men, of which we know only from testimony. This general experience,
moreover, is merely negative, and cannot neutralize that which is positive,
except upon principles which would invalidate all testimony whatever.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It requires belief in a greater wonder than those which it would
escape. That multitudes of intelligent and honest men should against all
their interests unite in deliberate and persistent falsehood, under the circumstances
narrated in the New Testament record, involves a change in the
sequences of nature far more incredible than the miracles of Christ and his
apostles.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) John Stuart Mill, Essays on Theism, 216-241, grants that, even if a miracle were
wrought, it would be impossible to prove it. In this he only echoes Hume, Miracles,
112&mdash;<q>The ultimate standard by which we determine all disputes that may arise is
always derived from experience and observation.</q> But here our own personal experience
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
is made the standard by which to judge all human experience. Whately, Historic
Doubts relative to Napoleon Buonaparte, shows that the same rule would require us to
deny the existence of the great Frenchman, since Napoleon's conquests were contrary
to all experience, and civilized nations had never before been so subdued. The London
Times for June 18, 1888, for the first time in at least a hundred years or in 31,200 issues,
was misdated, and certain pages read June 17, although June 17 was Sunday. Yet the
paper would have been admitted in a court of justice as evidence of a marriage. The
real wonder is, not the break in experience, but the continuity without the break.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Lyman Abbott: <q>If the Old Testament told the story of a naval engagement
between the Jewish people and a pagan people, in which all the ships of the pagan
people were absolutely destroyed and not a single man was killed among the Jews, all
the sceptics would have scorned the narrative. Every one now believes it, except those
who live in Spain.</q> There are people who in a similar way refuse to investigate the
phenomena of hypnotism, second sight, clairvoyance, and telepathy, declaring <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign>
that all these things are impossible. Prophecy, in the sense of prediction, is discredited.
Upon the same principle wireless telegraphy might be denounced as an imposture.
The son of Erin charged with murder defended himself by saying: <q>Your
honor, I can bring fifty people who did not see me do it.</q> Our faith in testimony cannot
be due to experience.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) On this point, see Chalmers, Christian Revelation, 3:70; Starkie on Evidence,
739; De Quincey, Theological Essays, 1:162-188; Thornton, Old-fashioned Ethics, 143-153;
Campbell on Miracles. South's sermon on The Certainty of our Savior's Resurrection
had stated and answered this objection long before Hume propounded it.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>5. Evidential force of Miracles.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Miracles are the natural accompaniments and attestations of new
communications from God. The great epochs of miracles&mdash;represented by
Moses, the prophets, the first and second comings of Christ&mdash;are coincident
with the great epochs of revelation. Miracles serve to draw attention
to new truth, and cease when this truth has gained currency and foothold.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Miracles are not scattered evenly over the whole course of history. Few miracles are
recorded during the 2500 years from Adam to Moses. When the N. T. Canon is completed
and the internal evidence of Scripture has attained its greatest strength, the
external attestations by miracle are either wholly withdrawn or begin to disappear.
The spiritual wonders of regeneration remain, and for these the way has been prepared
by the long progress from the miracles of power wrought by Moses to the miracles
of grace wrought by Christ. Miracles disappeared because newer and higher
proofs rendered them unnecessary. Better things than these are now in evidence.
Thomas Fuller: <q>Miracles are the swaddling-clothes of the infant church.</q> John Foster:
<q>Miracles are the great bell of the universe, which draws men to God's sermon.</q>
Henry Ward Beecher: <q>Miracles are the midwives of great moral truths; candles lit
before the dawn but put out after the sun has risen.</q> Illingworth, in Lux Mundi, 210&mdash;<q>When
we are told that miracles contradict experience, we point to the daily occurrence
of the spiritual miracle of regeneration and ask: <emph><q>Which is easier to say, Thy sins are forgiven;
or to say, Arise and walk?</q> (Mat. 9:5)</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Miracles and inspiration go together; if the former remain in the church, the latter
should remain also; see Marsh, in Bap. Quar. Rev., 1887:225-242. On the cessation of
miracles in the early church, see Henderson, Inspiration, 443-490; Bückmann, in Zeitsch.
f. luth. Theol. u. Kirche, 1878:216. On miracles in the second century, see Barnard,
Literature of the Second Century, 139-180. A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit,
167&mdash;<q>The apostles were commissioned to speak for Christ till the N. T. Scriptures, his
authoritative voice, were completed. In the apostolate we have a provisional inspiration;
in the N. T. a stereotyped inspiration; the first being endowed with authority <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad
interim</foreign> to forgive sins, and the second having this authority <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in perpetuo</foreign>.</q> Dr. Gordon
draws an analogy between coal, which is fossil sunlight, and the New Testament,
which is fossil inspiration. Sabatier, Philos. Religion, 74&mdash;<q>The Bible is very free from
the senseless prodigies of oriental mythology. The great prophets, Isaiah, Amos,
Micah, Jeremiah, John the Baptist, work no miracles. Jesus' temptation in the wilderness
is a victory of the moral consciousness over the religion of mere physical prodigy.</q>
Trench says that miracles cluster about the <emph>foundation</emph> of the theocratic kingdom
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
under Moses and Joshua, and about the <emph>restoration</emph> of that kingdom under Elijah and
Elisha. In the O. T., miracles confute the gods of Egypt under Moses, the Phœnician
Baal under Elijah and Elisha, and the gods of Babylon under Daniel. See Diman, Theistic
Argument, 376, and art.: Miracle, by Bernard, in Hastings' Bible Dictionary.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Miracles generally certify to the truth of doctrine, not directly, but
indirectly; otherwise a new miracle must needs accompany each new
doctrine taught. Miracles primarily and directly certify to the divine commission
and authority of a religious teacher, and therefore warrant acceptance
of his doctrines and obedience to his commands as the doctrines and
commands of God, whether these be communicated at intervals or all
together, orally or in written documents.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The exceptions to the above statement are very few, and are found only in cases
where the whole commission and authority of Christ, and not some fragmentary doctrine,
are involved. Jesus appeals to his miracles as proof of the truth of his teaching
in <emph>Mat. 9:5, 6&mdash;<q>Which is easier to say, Thy sins are forgiven; or to say, Arise and walk? But that ye may
know that the Son of man hath authority on earth to forgive sins (then saith he to the sick of the palsy), Arise, and
take up thy bed, and go unto thy house</q></emph>; <emph>12:28&mdash;<q>if I by the spirit of God cast out demons, then is the kingdom of
God come upon you.</q></emph> So Paul in <emph>Rom. 1:4</emph>, says that Jesus <emph><q>was declared to be the Son of God with
power, ... by the resurrection from the dead.</q></emph> Mair, Christian Evidences, 223, quotes from
Natural Religion, 181&mdash;<q>It is said that the theo-philanthropist Larévellière-Lépeaux
once confided to Talleyrand his disappointment at the ill success of his attempt to bring
into vogue a sort of improved Christianity, a sort of benevolent rationalism which he
had invented to meet the wants of a benevolent age. <q>His propaganda made no
way,</q> he said. <q>What was he to do?</q> he asked. The ex-bishop Talleyrand politely
condoled with him, feared it was a difficult task to found a new religion, more difficult
than he had imagined, so difficult that he hardly knew what to advise. <q>Still,</q>&mdash;so he
went on after a moment's reflection,&mdash;<q>there is one plan which you might at least try:
I should recommend you to be crucified, and to rise again the third day.</q></q> See also
Murphy, Scientific Bases of Faith, 147-167; Farrar, Life of Christ, 1:168-172.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Miracles, therefore, do not stand alone as evidences. Power alone
cannot prove a divine commission. Purity of life and doctrine must go
with the miracles to assure us that a religious teacher has come from God.
The miracles and the doctrine in this manner mutually support each other,
and form parts of one whole. The internal evidence for the Christian
system may have greater power over certain minds and over certain ages
than the external evidence.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Pascal's aphorism that <q>doctrines must be judged by miracles, miracles by doctrine,</q>
needs to be supplemented by Mozley's statement that <q>a supernatural fact is the proper
proof of a supernatural doctrine, while a supernatural doctrine is not the proper proof
of a supernatural fact.</q> E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 107, would <q>defend miracles,
but would not buttress up Christianity by them.... No amount of miracles
could convince a good man of the divine commission of a known bad man; nor, on the
other hand, could any degree of miraculous power suffice to silence the doubts of an
evil-minded man.... The miracle is a certification only to him who can perceive
its significance.... The Christian church has the resurrection written all over it.
Its very existence is proof of the resurrection. Twelve men could never have founded
the church, if Christ had remained in the tomb. The living church is the burning bush
that is not consumed.</q> Gore, Incarnation, 57&mdash;<q>Jesus did not appear after his resurrection
to unbelievers, but to believers only,&mdash;which means that this crowning miracle
was meant to confirm an existing faith, not to create one where it did not exist.</q>
</p>

<p>
Christian Union, July 11, 1891&mdash;<q>If the anticipated resurrection of Joseph Smith
were to take place, it would add nothing whatever to the authority of the Mormon
religion.</q> Schurman, Agnosticism and Religion, 57&mdash;<q>Miracles are merely the bells
to call primitive peoples to church. Sweet as the music they once made, modern ears
find them jangling and out of tune, and their dissonant notes scare away pious souls
who would fain enter the temple of worship.</q> A new definition of miracle which recognizes
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
their possible classification as extraordinary occurrences in nature, yet sees in
all nature the working of the living God, may do much to remove this prejudice.
Bishop of Southampton, Place of Miracle, 53&mdash;<q>Miracles alone could not produce conviction.
The Pharisees ascribed them to Beelzebub. Though Jesus had done so many
signs, yet they believed not.... Though miracles were frequently wrought, they
were rarely appealed to as evidence of the truth of the gospel. They are simply signs
of God's presence in his world. By itself a miracle had no evidential force. The only
test for distinguishing divine from Satanic miracles is that of the moral character and
purpose of the worker; and therefore miracles depend for all their force upon a previous
appreciation of the character and personality of Christ (79). The earliest apologists
make no use of miracles. They are of no value except in connection with prophecy.
Miracles <emph>are</emph> the revelation of God, not the <emph>proof</emph> of revelation.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Versus</hi> Supernatural
Religion, 1:23, and Stearns, in New Englander, Jan. 1882:80. See Mozley, Miracles,
15; Nicoll, Life of Jesus Christ, 133; Mill, Logic, 374-382; H. B. Smith, Int. to
Christ. Theology, 167-169; Fisher, in Journ. Christ. Philos., April, 1883:270-283.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Yet the Christian miracles do not lose their value as evidence in the
process of ages. The loftier the structure of Christian life and doctrine the
greater need that its foundation be secure. The authority of Christ as a
teacher of supernatural truth rests upon his miracles, and especially upon
the miracle of his resurrection. That one miracle to which the church
looks back as the source of her life carries with it irresistibly all the other
miracles of the Scripture record; upon it alone we may safely rest the
proof that the Scriptures are an authoritative revelation from God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The miracles of Christ are simple correlates of the Incarnation&mdash;proper insignia of
his royalty and divinity. By mere external evidence however we can more easily
prove the resurrection than the incarnation. In our arguments with sceptics, we
should not begin with the ass that spoke to Balaam, or the fish that swallowed Jonah,
but with the resurrection of Christ; that conceded, all other Biblical miracles will seem
only natural preparations, accompaniments, or consequences. G. F. Wright, in Bib.
Sac., 1889:707&mdash;<q>The difficulties created by the miraculous character of Christianity
may be compared to those assumed by a builder when great permanence is desired in
the structure erected. It is easier to lay the foundation of a temporary structure
than of one which is to endure for the ages.</q> Pressensé: <q>The empty tomb of Christ
has been the cradle of the church, and if in this foundation of her faith the church has
been mistaken, she must needs lay herself down by the side of the mortal remains, I
say, not of a man, but of a religion.</q>
</p>

<p>
President Schurman believes the resurrection of Christ to be <q>an obsolete picture of
an eternal truth&mdash;the fact of a continued life with God.</q> Harnack, Wesen des Christenthums,
102, thinks no consistent union of the gospel accounts of Christ's resurrection
can be attained; apparently doubts a literal and bodily rising; yet traces Christianity
back to an invincible faith in Christ's conquering of death and his continued life.
But why believe the gospels when they speak of the sympathy of Christ, yet disbelieve
them when they speak of his miraculous power? We have no right to trust the narrative
when it gives us Christ's words <emph><q>Weep not</q></emph> to the widow of Nain, (<emph>Luke 7:13</emph>), and
then to distrust it when it tells us of his raising the widow's son. The words <emph><q>Jesus wept</q></emph>
belong inseparably to a story of which <emph><q>Lazarus, come forth!</q></emph> forms a part (<emph>John 11:35, 43</emph>).
It is improbable that the disciples should have believed so stupendous a miracle as
Christ's resurrection, if they had not previously seen other manifestations of miraculous
power on the part of Christ. Christ himself is the great miracle. The conception
of him as the risen and glorified Savior can be explained only by the fact that he did so
rise. E. G. Robinson, Christ. Theology, 109&mdash;<q>The Church attests the fact of the resurrection
quite as much as the resurrection attests the divine origin of the church. Resurrection,
as an evidence, depends on the existence of the church which proclaims it.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) The resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ&mdash;by which we mean
his coming forth from the sepulchre in body as well as in spirit&mdash;is demonstrated
by evidence as varied and as conclusive as that which proves to us
any single fact of ancient history. Without it Christianity itself is inexplicable,
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
as is shown by the failure of all modern rationalistic theories to
account for its rise and progress.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In discussing the evidence of Jesus' resurrection, we are confronted with three main
rationalistic theories:
</p>

<p>
I. The <hi rend='italic'>Swoon-theory</hi> of Strauss. This holds that Jesus did not really die. The cold
and the spices of the sepulchre revived him. We reply that the blood and water, and
the testimony of the centurion (<emph>Mark 15:45</emph>), proved actual death (see Bib. Sac., April,
1889:228; Forrest, Christ of History and Experience, 137-170). The rolling away of the
stone, and Jesus' power immediately after, are inconsistent with immediately preceding
swoon and suspended animation. How was his life preserved? where did he go?
when did he die? His not dying implies deceit on his own part or on that of his
disciples.
</p>

<p>
II. The <hi rend='italic'>Spirit-theory</hi> of Keim. Jesus really died, but only his spirit appeared. The
spirit of Jesus gave the disciples a sign of his continued life, a telegram from heaven.
But we reply that the telegram was untrue, for it asserted that his body had risen from
the tomb. The tomb was empty and the linen cloths showed an orderly departure.
Jesus himself denied that he was a bodiless spirit: <emph><q>a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me
having</q> (Luke 24:39)</emph>. Did <emph><q>his flesh see corruption</q> (Acts 2:31)</emph>? Was the penitent thief raised
from the dead as much as he? Godet, Lectures in Defence of the Christian Faith, lect. i:
A dilemma for those who deny the fact of Christ's resurrection: Either his body
remained in the hands of his disciples, or it was given up to the Jews. If the disciples
retained it, they were impostors: but this is not maintained by modern rationalists. If
the Jews retained it, why did they not produce it as conclusive evidence against the
disciples?
</p>

<p>
III. The <hi rend='italic'>Vision-theory</hi> of Renan. Jesus died, and there was no objective appearance
even of his spirit. Mary Magdalene was the victim of subjective hallucination, and
her hallucination became contagious. This was natural because the Jews expected
that the Messiah would work miracles and would rise from the dead. We reply that
the disciples did not expect Jesus' resurrection. The women went to the sepulchre,
not to see a risen Redeemer, but to embalm a dead body. Thomas and those at
Emmaus had given up all hope. Four hundred years had passed since the days of
miracles; John the Baptist <emph><q>did no miracle</q> (John 10:41)</emph>; the Sadducees said <emph><q>there is no resurrection</q>
(Mat. 22:23)</emph>. There were thirteen different appearances, to: 1. the Magdalen; 2.
other women; 3. Peter; 4. Emmaus; 5. the Twelve; 6. the Twelve after eight days;
7. Galilee seashore; 8. Galilee mountain; 9. Galilee five hundred; 10. James; 11. ascension
at Bethany; 12. Stephen; 13. Paul on way to Damascus. Paul describes Christ's appearance
to him as something objective, and he implies that Christ's previous appearances
to others were objective also: <emph><q rend='pre'>last of all</q></emph> [these bodily appearances], ... <emph><q rend='post'>he appeared to me also</q>
(1 Cor. 15:8)</emph>. Bruce, Apologetics, 396&mdash;<q>Paul's interest and intention in classing the two
together was to level his own vision [of Christ] up to the objectivity of the early Christophanies.
He believed that the eleven, that Peter in particular, had seen the risen Christ
with the eye of the body, and he meant to claim for himself a vision of the same kind.</q>
Paul's was a sane, strong nature. Subjective visions do not transform human lives;
the resurrection moulded the apostles; they did not create the resurrection (see Gore,
Incarnation, 76). These appearances soon ceased, unlike the law of hallucinations,
which increase in frequency and intensity. It is impossible to explain the ordinances,
the Lord's day, or Christianity itself, if Jesus did not rise from the dead.
</p>

<p>
The resurrection of our Lord teaches three important lessons: (1) It showed that his
work of atonement was completed and was stamped with the divine approval; (2) It
showed him to be Lord of all and gave the one sufficient external proof of Christianity;
(3) It furnished the ground and pledge of our own resurrection, and thus <emph><q>brought life and
immortality to light</q> (2 Tim. 1:10)</emph>. It must be remembered that the resurrection was the one
sign upon which Jesus himself staked his claims&mdash;<emph><q>the sign of Jonah</q> (Luke 11:29)</emph>; and that
the resurrection is proof, not simply of God's power, but of Christ's own power: <emph>John
10:18&mdash;<q>I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again</q></emph>; <emph>2:19&mdash;<q>Destroy this temple, and in
three days I will raise it up</q></emph>.... <emph>21&mdash;<q>he spake of the temple of his body.</q></emph> See Alexander, Christ
and Christianity, 9, 158-224, 302; Mill, Theism, 216; Auberlen, Div. Revelation, 56;
Boston Lectures, 203-239; Christlieb, Modern Doubt and Christian Belief, 448-503; Row,
Bampton Lectures, 1887:358-423; Hutton, Essays, 1:119; Schaff, in Princeton Rev., May,
1880; 411-419; Fisher, Christian Evidences, 41-46, 82-85; West, in Defence and Conf. of
Faith, 80-129; also special works on the Resurrection of our Lord, by Milligan, Morrison,
Kennedy, J. Baldwin Brown.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>6. Counterfeit Miracles.</head>

<p>
Since only an act directly wrought by God can properly be called a
miracle, it follows that surprising events brought about by evil spirits or
by men, through the use of natural agencies beyond our knowledge, are
not entitled to this appellation. The Scriptures recognize the existence of
such, but denominate them <q>lying wonders</q> (2 Thess. 2:9).
</p>

<p>
These counterfeit miracles in various ages argue that the belief in miracles
is natural to the race, and that somewhere there must exist the true. They
serve to show that not all supernatural occurrences are divine, and to impress
upon us the necessity of careful examination before we accept them as
divine.
</p>

<p>
False miracles may commonly be distinguished from the true by (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) their
accompaniments of immoral conduct or of doctrine contradictory to truth
already revealed&mdash;as in modern spiritualism; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) their internal characteristics
of inanity and extravagance&mdash;as in the liquefaction of the blood of
St. Januarius, or the miracles of the Apocryphal New Testament; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the
insufficiency of the object which they are designed to further&mdash;as in the
case of Apollonius of Tyana, or of the miracles said to accompany the publication
of the doctrines of the immaculate conception and of the papal
infallibility; (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) their lack of substantiating evidence&mdash;as in mediæval
miracles, so seldom attested by contemporary and disinterested witnesses;
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) their denial or undervaluing of God's previous revelation of himself in
nature&mdash;as shown by the neglect of ordinary means, in the cases of Faith-cure
and of so-called Christian Science.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Only what is valuable is counterfeited. False miracles presuppose the true. Fisher,
Nature and Method of Revelation, 283&mdash;<q>The miracles of Jesus originated faith in him,
while mediæval miracles follow established faith. The testimony of the apostles was
given in the face of incredulous Sadducees. They were ridiculed and maltreated on
account of it. It was no time for devout dreams and the invention of romances.</q>
The blood of St. Januarius at Naples is said to be contained in a vial, one side of which
is of thick glass, while the other side is of thin. A similar miracle was wrought at
Hales in Gloucestershire. St. Alban, the first martyr of Britain, after his head is cut
off, carries it about in his hand. In Ireland the place is shown where St. Patrick in the
fifth century drove all the toads and snakes over a precipice into the nether regions.
The legend however did not become current until some hundreds of years after the
saint's bones had crumbled to dust at Saul, near Downpatrick (see Hemphill, Literature
of the Second Century, 180-182). Compare the story of the book of Tobit (6-8),
which relates the expulsion of a demon by smoke from the burning heart and liver of a
fish caught in the Tigris, and the story of the Apocryphal New Testament (I, Infancy),
which tells of the expulsion of Satan in the form of a mad dog from Judas by the
child Jesus. On counterfeit miracles in general, see Mozley, Miracles, 15, 161; F. W.
Farrar, Witness of History to Christ, 72; A. S. Farrar, Science and Theology, 208;
Tholuck, Vermischte Schriften, 1:27; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 1:630; Presb. Rev., 1881:687-719.
</p>

<p>
Some modern writers have maintained that the gift of miracles still remains in the
church. Bengel: <q>The reason why <emph>many</emph> miracles are not now wrought is not so
much because <emph>faith</emph> is established, as because <emph>unbelief</emph> reigns.</q> Christlieb: <q>It is the
want of faith in our age which is the greatest hindrance to the stronger and more
marked appearance of that miraculous power which is working here and there in quiet
concealment. Unbelief is the final and most important reason for the retrogression of
miracles.</q> Edward Irving, Works, 5:464&mdash;<q>Sickness is sin apparent in the body, the
presentiment of death, the forerunner of corruption. Now, as Christ came to destroy
death, and will yet redeem the body from the bondage of corruption, if the church is
to have a first fruits or earnest of this power, it must be by receiving power over diseases
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
that are the first fruits and earnest of death.</q> Dr. A. J. Gordon, in his Ministry
of Healing, held to this view. See also Boys, Proofs of the Miraculous in the Experience
of the Church; Bushnell, Nature and the Supernatural, 446-492; Review of Gordon,
by Vincent, in Presb. Rev., 1883:473-502; Review of Vincent, in Presb. Rev., 1884:49-79.
</p>

<p>
In reply to the advocates of faith-cure in general, we would grant that nature is plastic
in God's hand; that he can work miracle when and where it pleases him; and that
he has given promises which, with certain Scriptural and rational limitations, encourage
believing prayer for healing in cases of sickness. But we incline to the belief that
in these later ages God answers such prayer, not by miracle, but by special providence,
and by gifts of courage, faith and will, thus acting by his Spirit directly upon the soul and
only indirectly upon the body. The laws of nature are generic volitions of God, and to
ignore them and disuse means is presumption and disrespect to God himself. The
Scripture promise to faith is always expressly or impliedly conditioned upon our use
of means: we are to work out our own salvation, for the very reason that it is God who
works in us; it is vain for the drowning man to pray, so long as he refuses to lay hold
of the rope that is thrown to him. Medicines and physicians are the rope thrown to us
by God; we cannot expect miraculous help, while we neglect the help God has already
given us; to refuse this help is practically to deny Christ's revelation in nature. Why
not live without eating, as well as recover from sickness without medicine? Faith-feeding
is quite as rational as faith-healing. To except cases of disease from this general rule
as to the use of means has no warrant either in reason or in Scripture. The atonement
has purchased complete salvation, and some day salvation shall be ours. But death and
depravity still remain, not as penalty, but as chastisement. So disease remains also.
Hospitals for Incurables, and the deaths even of advocates of faith-cure, show that they
too are compelled to recognize some limit to the application of the New Testament
promise.
</p>

<p>
In view of the preceding discussion we must regard the so-called Christian Science as
neither Christian nor scientific. Mrs. Mary Baker G. Eddy denies the authority of all
that part of revelation which God has made to man in nature, and holds that the
laws of nature may be disregarded with impunity by those who have proper faith; see
G. F. Wright, in Bib. Sac., April, 1899:375. Bishop Lawrence of Massachusetts: <q>One
of the errors of Christian Science is its neglect of accumulated knowledge, of the
fund of information stored up for these Christian centuries. That knowledge is just
as much God's gift as is the knowledge obtained from direct revelation. In rejecting
accumulated knowledge and professional skill, Christian Science rejects the gift of
God.</q> Most of the professed cures of Christian Science are explicable by the influence
of the mind upon the body, through hypnosis or suggestion; (see A. A. Bennett, in
Watchman, Feb. 13, 1903). Mental disturbance may make the mother's milk a poison to
the child; mental excitement is a common cause of indigestion; mental depression
induces bowel disorders; depressed mental and moral conditions render a person more
susceptible to grippe, pneumonia, typhoid fever. Reading the account of an accident
in which the body is torn or maimed, we ourselves feel pain in the same spot; when the
child's hand is crushed, the mother's hand, though at a distance, becomes swollen; the
mediæval <foreign rend='italic'>stigmata</foreign> probably resulted from continuous brooding upon the sufferings of
Christ (see Carpenter, Mental Physiology, 676-690).
</p>

<p>
But mental states may help as well as harm the body. Mental expectancy facilitates
cure in cases of sickness. The physician helps the patient by inspiring hope and courage.
Imagination works wonders, especially in the case of nervous disorders. The
diseases said to be cured by Christian Science are commonly of this sort. In every age
fakirs, mesmerists, and quacks have availed themselves of these underlying mental
forces. By inducing expectancy, imparting courage, rousing the paralyzed will, they
have indirectly caused bodily changes which have been mistaken for miracle. Tacitus
tells us of the healing of a blind man by the Emperor Vespasian. Undoubted cures have
been wrought by the royal touch in England. Since such wonders have been performed
by Indian medicine-men, we cannot regard them as having any specific Christian
character, and when, as in the present case, we find them used to aid in the spread
of false doctrine with regard to sin, Christ, atonement, and the church, we must class
them with the <emph><q>lying wonders</q></emph> of which we are warned in <emph>2 Thess. 2:9</emph>. See Harris, Philosophical
Basis of Theism, 381-386; Buckley, Faith-Healing, and in Century Magazine,
June, 1886:221-236; Bruce, Miraculous Element in Gospels, lecture 8; Andover Review,
1887:249-264.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Prophecy as Attesting a Divine Revelation.</head>

<p>
We here consider prophecy in its narrow sense of mere prediction,
reserving to a subsequent chapter the consideration of prophecy as interpretation
of the divine will in general.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Definition.</hi> Prophecy is the foretelling of future events by virtue of
direct communication from God&mdash;a foretelling, therefore, which, though
not contravening any laws of the human mind, those laws, if fully known,
would not, without this agency of God, be sufficient to explain.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In discussing the subject of prophecy, we are met at the outset by the contention
that there is not, and never has been, any real foretelling of future events beyond that
which is possible to natural prescience. This is the view of Kuenen, Prophets and
Prophecy in Israel. Pfleiderer, Philos. Relig., 2:42, denies any direct prediction. Prophecy
in Israel, he intimates, was simply the consciousness of God's righteousness, proclaiming
its ideals of the future, and declaring that the will of God is the moral ideal
of the good and the law of the world's history, so that the fates of nations are conditioned
by their bearing toward this moral purpose of God: <q>The fundamental error
of the vulgar apologetics is that it confounds prophecy with heathen soothsaying&mdash;national
salvation without character.</q> W. Robertson Smith, in Encyc. Britannica, 19:821,
tells us that <q>detailed prediction occupies a very secondary place in the writings of
the prophets; or rather indeed what seem to be predictions in detail are usually only
free poetical illustrations of historical principles, which neither received nor demanded
exact fulfilment.</q>
</p>

<p>
As in the case of miracles, our faith in an immanent God, who is none other than the
Logos or larger Christ, gives us a point of view from which we may reconcile the contentions
of the naturalists and supernaturalists. Prophecy is an immediate act of
God; but, since all natural genius is also due to God's energizing, we do not need to
deny the employment of man's natural gifts in prophecy. The instances of telepathy,
presentiment, and second sight which the Society for Psychical Research has demonstrated
to be facts show that prediction, in the history of divine revelation, may be
only an intensification, under the extraordinary impulse of the divine Spirit, of a power
that is in some degree latent in all men. The author of every great work of creative
imagination knows that a higher power than his own has possessed him. In all human
reason there is a natural activity of the divine Reason or Logos, and he is <emph><q>the light which
lighteth every man</q> (John 1:9)</emph>. So there is a natural activity of the Holy Spirit, and he who
completes the circle of the divine consciousness completes also the circle of human
consciousness, gives self-hood to every soul, makes available to man the natural as well
as the spiritual gifts of Christ; <emph><hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> John 16:14&mdash;<q>he shall take of mine, and shall declare it unto you.</q></emph>
The same Spirit who in the beginning <emph><q>brooded over the face of the waters</q> (Gen. 1:2)</emph> also broods
over humanity, and it is he who, according to Christ's promise, was to <emph><q>declare unto you the
things that are to come</q> (John 16:13)</emph>. The gift of prophecy may have its natural side, like the
gift of miracles, yet may be finally explicable only as the result of an extraordinary
working of that Spirit of Christ who to some degree manifests himself in the reason
and conscience of every man; <emph><hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> 1 Pet 1:11&mdash;<q>searching what time or what manner of time the Spirit
of Christ which was in them did point unto, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glories that
should follow them.</q></emph> See Myers, Human Personality, 2:262-292.
</p>

<p>
A. B. Davidson, in his article on Prophecy and Prophets, in Hastings' Bible Dictionary,
4:120, 121, gives little weight to this view that prophecy is based on a natural power of
the human mind: <q>The arguments by which Giesebrecht, Berufsgabung, 13 ff., supports
the theory of a <q>faculty of presentiment</q> have little cogency. This faculty is
supposed to reveal itself particularly on the approach of death (<emph>Gen. 28</emph> and <emph>49</emph>). The contemporaries
of most great religious personages have attributed to them a prophetic
gift. The answer of John Knox to those who credited him with such a gift is worth
reading: <q>My assurances are not marvels of Merlin, nor yet the dark sentences of profane
prophecy. But <emph>first</emph>, the plain truth of God's word; <emph>second</emph>, the invincible justice
of the everlasting God; and <emph>third</emph>, the ordinary course of his punishments and plagues
from the beginning, are my assurances and grounds.</q></q> While Davidson grants the fulfilment
of certain specific predictions of Scripture, to be hereafter mentioned, he holds
that <q>such presentiments as we can observe to be authentic are chiefly products of the
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
conscience or moral reason. True prophecy is based on moral grounds. Everywhere
the menacing future is connected with the evil past by <emph><q>therefore</q> (Micah 3:12; Is. 5:13; Amos
1:2)</emph>.</q> We hold with Davidson to the moral element in prophecy, but we also recognize
a power in normal humanity which he would minimize or deny. We claim that
the human mind even in its ordinary and secular working gives occasional signs of
transcending the limitations of the present. Believing in the continual activity of
the divine Reason in the reason of man, we have no need to doubt the possibility of
an extraordinary insight into the future, and such insight is needed at the great epochs
of religious history. Expositor's Gk. Test., 2:34&mdash;<q>Savonarola foretold as early as
1496 the capture of Rome, which happened in 1527, and he did this not only in general
terms but in detail; his words were realized to the letter when the sacred churches
of St. Peter and St. Paul became, as the prophet foretold, stables for the conquerors'
horses.</q> On the general subject, see Payne-Smith, Prophecy a Preparation for
Christ; Alexander, Christ and Christianity; Farrar, Science and Theology, 106; Newton
on Prophecy; Fairbairn on Prophecy.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Relation of Prophecy to Miracles.</hi> Miracles are attestations of
revelation proceeding from divine power; prophecy is an attestation of revelation
proceeding from divine knowledge. Only God can know the contingencies
of the future. The possibility and probability of prophecy may
be argued upon the same grounds upon which we argue the possibility and
probability of miracles. As an evidence of divine revelation, however,
prophecy possesses two advantages over miracles, namely: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The proof,
in the case of prophecy, is not derived from ancient testimony, but is under
our eyes. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The evidence of miracles cannot become stronger, whereas
every new fulfilment adds to the argument from prophecy.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Requirements in Prophecy, considered as an Evidence of Revelation.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The utterance must be distant from the event. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Nothing
must exist to suggest the event to merely natural prescience. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The
utterance must be free from ambiguity. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Yet it must not be so precise
as to secure its own fulfilment. (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) It must be followed in due time
by the event predicted.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Hume: <q>All prophecies are real miracles, and only as such can be admitted as proof
of any revelation.</q> See Wardlaw, Syst. Theol., 1:347. (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Hundreds of years intervened
between certain of the O. T. predictions and their fulfilment. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Stanley
instances the natural sagacity of Burke, which enabled him to predict the French Revolution.
But Burke also predicted in 1793 that France would be partitioned like Poland
among a confederacy of hostile powers. Canning predicted that South American
colonies would grow up as the United States had grown. D'Israeli predicted that our
Southern Confederacy would become an independent nation. Ingersoll predicted that
within ten years there would be two theatres for one church. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Illustrate ambiguous
prophecies by the Delphic oracle to Crœsus: <q>Crossing the river, thou destroyest
a great nation</q>&mdash;whether his own or his enemy's the oracle left undetermined. <q>Ibis
et redibis nunquam peribis in bello.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Strauss held that O. T. prophecy itself
determined either the events or the narratives of the gospels. See Greg, Creed of
Christendom, chap. 4. (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) Cardan, the Italian mathematician, predicted the day and
hour of his own death, and committed suicide at the proper time to prove the prediction
true. Jehovah makes the fulfilment of his predictions the proof of his deity in
the controversy with false gods: <emph>Is. 41:23&mdash;<q>Declare the things that are to come hereafter, that we may
know that ye are gods</q></emph>; <emph>42:9&mdash;<q>Behold, the former things are come to pass and new things do I declare: before
they spring forth I tell you of them.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>General Features of Prophecy in the Scriptures.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Its large
amount&mdash;occupying a great portion of the Bible, and extending over many
hundred years. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Its ethical and religious nature&mdash;the events of the
future being regarded as outgrowths and results of men's present attitude
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
toward God. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Its unity in diversity&mdash;finding its central point in
Christ the true servant of God and deliverer of his people. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Its actual
fulfilment as regards many of its predictions&mdash;while seeming non-fulfilments
are explicable from its figurative and conditional nature.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
A. B. Davidson, in Hastings' Bible Dictionary, 4:125, has suggested reasons for the
apparent non-fulfilment of certain predictions. Prophecy is poetical and figurative;
its details are not to be pressed; they are only drapery, needed for the expression of the
idea. In <emph>Isa. 13:16&mdash;<q>Their infants shall be dashed in pieces ... and their wives ravished</q></emph>&mdash;the prophet
gives an ideal picture of the sack of a city; these things did not actually happen, but
Cyrus entered Babylon <emph><q>in peace.</q></emph> Yet the essential truth remained that the city fell
into the enemy's hands. The prediction of Ezekiel with regard to Tyre, <emph>Ez. 26:7-14</emph>, is recognized
in <emph>Ez. 29:17-20</emph> as having been fulfilled not in its details but in its essence&mdash;the
actual event having been the breaking of the power of Tyre by Nebuchadnezzar. <emph>Is. 17:1&mdash;<q>Behold,
Damascus is taken away from being a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap</q></emph>&mdash;must be interpreted
as predicting the blotting out of its dominion, since Damascus has probably never
ceased to be a city. The conditional nature of prophecy explains other seeming non-fulfilments.
Predictions were often threats, which might be revoked upon repentance.
<emph>Jer. 26:13&mdash;<q>amend your ways ... and the Lord will repent him of the evil which he hath pronounced against
you.</q></emph> <emph>Jonah 3:4&mdash;<q>Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown ...</q></emph> <emph>10&mdash;God saw their works, that they
turned from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, which he said he would do unto them; and he did it not</emph>;
<emph><hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Jer. 18:8</emph>; <emph>26:19</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Instances of actual fulfilment of prophecy are found, according to Davidson, in Samuel's
prediction of some things that would happen to Saul, which the history declares
did happen (<emph>1 Sam. 1</emph> and <emph>10</emph>). Jeremiah predicted the death of Hananiah within the year,
which took place (<emph>Jer. 28</emph>). Micaiah predicted the defeat and death of Ahab at Ramoth-Gilead
(<emph>1 Kings 22</emph>). Isaiah predicted the failure of the northern coalition to subdue Jerusalem
(<emph>Is. 7</emph>); the overthrow in two or three years of Damascus and Northern Israel
before the Assyrians (<emph>Is. 8 and 17</emph>); the failure of Sennacherib to capture Jerusalem, and
the melting away of his army (<emph>Is. 37:34-37</emph>). <q>And in general, apart from details, the
main predictions of the prophets regarding Israel and the nations were verified in history,
for example, <emph>Amos 1</emph> and <emph>2</emph>. The chief predictions of the prophets relate to the
imminent downfall of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah; to what lies beyond this,
namely, the restoration of the kingdom of God; and to the state of the people in their
condition of final felicity.</q> For predictions of the exile and the return of Israel, see
especially <emph>Amos 9:9&mdash;<q rend='pre'>For, lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all the nations, like as
grain is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least kernel fall upon the earth....</q></emph> <emph>14&mdash;<q  rend='post'>And I will bring again the
captivity of my people Israel, and they shall build the waste cities and inhabit them.</q></emph> Even if we accept the
theory of composite authorship of the book of Isaiah, we still have a foretelling of the
sending back of the Jews from Babylon, and a designation of Cyrus as God's agent, in
<emph>Is. 44:28&mdash;<q>that saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: even saying of Jerusalem,
She shall be built; and of the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid</q></emph>; see George Adam Smith, in Hastings'
Bible Dictionary, 2:493. Frederick the Great said to his chaplain: <q>Give me in
one word a proof of the divine origin of the Bible</q>; and the chaplain well replied:
<q>The Jews, your Majesty.</q> In the case of the Jews we have even now the unique phenomena
of a people without a land, and a land without a people,&mdash;yet both these were
predicted centuries before the event.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>Messianic Prophecy in general.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Direct predictions of events&mdash;as
in Old Testament prophecies of Christ's birth, suffering and subsequent
glory. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) General prophecy of the Kingdom in the Old Testament,
and of its gradual triumph. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Historical types in a nation and
in individuals&mdash;as Jonah and David. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Prefigurations of the future
in rites and ordinances&mdash;as in sacrifice, circumcision, and the passover.
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='italic'>Special Prophecies uttered by Christ.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) As to his own death
and resurrection. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) As to events occurring between his death and the
destruction of Jerusalem (multitudes of impostors; wars and rumors of
wars; famine and pestilence). (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) As to the destruction of Jerusalem
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
and the Jewish polity (Jerusalem compassed with armies; abomination of
desolation in the holy place; flight of Christians; misery; massacre; dispersion).
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) As to the world-wide diffusion of his gospel (the Bible
already the most widely circulated book in the world).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The most important feature in prophecy is its Messianic element; see <emph>Luke 24:27&mdash;<q>beginning
from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning
himself</q></emph>; <emph>Acts 10:43&mdash;<q>to him bear all the prophets witness</q></emph>; <emph>Rev. 19:10&mdash;<q>the testimony of Jesus is the
spirit of prophecy.</q></emph> Types are intended resemblances, designed prefigurations; for example,
Israel is a type of the Christian church; outside nations are types of the hostile
world; Jonah and David are types of Christ. The typical nature of Israel rests upon
the deeper fact of the community of life. As the life of God the Logos lies at the basis
of universal humanity and interpenetrates it in every part, so out of this universal
humanity grows Israel in general; out of Israel as a nation springs the spiritual Israel,
and out of spiritual Israel Christ according to the flesh,&mdash;the upward rising pyramid
finds its apex and culmination in him. Hence the predictions with regard to <emph><q>the servant
of Jehovah</q> (Is. 42:1-7)</emph>, and <emph><q>the Messiah</q> (Is. 61:1; John 1:41)</emph>, have partial fulfilment in Israel,
but perfect fulfilment only in Christ; so Delitzsch, Oehler, and Cheyne on Isaiah, 2:253.
Sabatier, Philos. Religion, 59&mdash;<q>If humanity were not potentially and in some degree
Immanuel, God with us, there would never have issued from its bosom he who bore
and revealed this blessed name.</q> Gardiner, O. T. and N. T. in their Mutual Relations,
170-194.
</p>

<p>
In the O. T., Jehovah is the Redeemer of his people. He works through judges,
prophets, kings, but he himself remains the Savior; <q>it is only the Divine in them that
saves</q>; <emph><q>Salvation is of Jehovah</q> (Jonah 2:9)</emph>. Jehovah is manifested in the Davidic King
under the monarchy; in Israel, the Servant of the Lord, during the exile; and in the
Messiah, or Anointed One, in the post-exilian period. Because of its conscious identification
with Jehovah, Israel is always a forward-looking people. Each new judge,
king, prophet is regarded as heralding the coming reign of righteousness and peace.
These earthly deliverers are saluted with rapturous expectation; the prophets express
this expectation in terms that transcend the possibilities of the present; and, when this
expectation fails to be fully realized, the Messianic hope is simply transferred to a
larger future. Each separate prophecy has its drapery furnished by the prophet's
immediate surroundings, and finds its occasion in some event of contemporaneous history.
But by degrees it becomes evident that only an ideal and perfect King and Savior
can fill out the requirements of prophecy. Only when Christ appears, does the
real meaning of the various Old Testament predictions become manifest. Only then
are men able to combine the seemingly inconsistent prophecies of a priest who is also a
king (<emph>Psalm 110</emph>), and of a royal but at the same time a suffering Messiah (<emph>Isaiah 53</emph>). It
is not enough for us to ask what the prophet himself meant, or what his earliest hearers
understood, by his prophecy. This is to regard prophecy as having only a single,
and that a human, author. With the spirit of man coöperated the Spirit of Christ, the
Holy Spirit (<emph>1 Pet. 1:11&mdash;<q>the Spirit of Christ which was in them</q></emph>; <emph>2 Pet. 1:21&mdash;<q>no prophecy ever came by
the will of man; but men spake from God, being moved by the Holy Spirit</q></emph>). All prophecy has a twofold
authorship, human and divine; the same Christ who spoke through the prophets
brought about the fulfilment of their words.
</p>

<p>
It is no wonder that he who through the prophets uttered predictions with regard to
himself should, when he became incarnate, be the prophet <foreign rend='italic'>par excellence</foreign> (<emph>Deut. 18:15</emph>; <emph>Acts
3:22&mdash;<q>Moses indeed said, A prophet shall the Lord God raise up from among your brethren, like unto me; to him
shall ye hearken</q></emph>). In the predictions of Jesus we find the proper key to the interpretation
of prophecy in general, and the evidence that while no one of the three theories&mdash;the
preterist, the continuist, the futurist&mdash;furnishes an exhaustive explanation, each
one of these has its element of truth. Our Lord made the fulfilment of the prediction
of his own resurrection a test of his divine commission: it was <emph><q>the sign of Jonah the prophet</q>
(Mat. 12:39)</emph>. He promised that his disciples should have prophetic gifts: <emph>John 15:15&mdash;<q>No
longer do I call you servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have called you friends; for
all things that I heard from my Father I have made known unto you</q></emph>; <emph>16:13&mdash;<q>the Spirit of truth ... he
shall declare unto you the things that are to come.</q></emph> Agabus predicted the famine and Paul's
imprisonment (<emph>Acts 11:28</emph>; <emph>21:10</emph>); Paul predicted heresies (<emph>Acts 20:29, 30</emph>), shipwreck (<emph>Acts
27:10, 21-26</emph>), <emph><q>the man of sin</q> (2 Thess. 2:3)</emph>, Christ's second coming, and the resurrection of
the saints (<emph>1 Thess. 4:15-17</emph>).
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>

<p>7. On the double sense of Prophecy.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Certain prophecies apparently contain a fulness of meaning which
is not exhausted by the event to which they most obviously and literally
refer. A prophecy which had a partial fulfilment at a time not remote
from its utterance, may find its chief fulfilment in an event far distant.
Since the principles of God's administration find ever recurring and ever
enlarging illustration in history, prophecies which have already had a
partial fulfilment may have whole cycles of fulfilment yet before them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In prophecy there is an absence of perspective; as in Japanese pictures the near and
the far appear equally distant; as in dissolving views, the immediate future melts into
a future immeasurably far away. The candle that shines through a narrow aperture
sends out its light through an ever-increasing area; sections of the triangle correspond
to each other, but the more distant are far greater than the near. The châlet on the
mountain-side may turn out to be only a black cat on the woodpile, or a speck upon the
window pane. <q>A hill which appears to rise close behind another is found on nearer
approach to have receded a great way from it.</q> The painter, by foreshortening, brings
together things or parts that are relatively distant from each other. The prophet is a
painter whose foreshortenings are supernatural; he seems freed from the law of space
and time, and, rapt into the timelessness of God, he views the events of history <q>sub
specie eternitatis.</q> Prophecy was the sketching of an outline-map. Even the prophet
could not fill up the outline. The absence of perspective in prophecy may account
for Paul's being misunderstood by the Thessalonians, and for the necessity of his explanations
in <emph>2 Thess. 2:1, 2</emph>. In <emph>Isaiah 10</emph> and <emph>11</emph>, the fall of Lebanon (the Assyrian) is immediately
connected with the rise of the Branch (Christ); in <emph>Jeremiah 51:41</emph>, the first capture
and the complete destruction of Babylon are connected with each other, without notice
of the interval of a thousand years between them.
</p>

<p>
Instances of the double sense of prophecy may be found in <emph>Is. 7:14-16</emph>; <emph>9:6, 7&mdash;<q>a virgin
shall conceive and bear a son, ... unto us a son is given</q></emph>&mdash;compared with <emph>Mat. 1:22, 23</emph>, where the
prophecy is applied to Christ (see Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>); <emph>Hos. 11:1&mdash;<q>I ... called my son out of
Egypt</q></emph>&mdash;referring originally to the calling of the nation out of Egypt&mdash;is in <emph>Mat. 2:15</emph>
referred to Christ, who embodied and consummated the mission of Israel; <emph>Psalm 118:22,
23&mdash;<q>The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner</q></emph>&mdash;which primarily referred
to the Jewish nation, conquered, carried away, and flung aside as of no use, but divinely
destined to a future of importance and grandeur, is in <emph>Mat. 21:42</emph> referred by Jesus to
himself, as the true embodiment of Israel. William Arnold Stevens, on The Man of
Sin, in Bap. Quar. Rev., July, 1889:328-360&mdash;As in <emph>Daniel 11:36</emph>, the great enemy of the
faith, who <emph><q>shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god,</q></emph> is the Syrian King, Antiochus
Epiphanes, so <emph><q>the man of lawlessness</q></emph> described by Paul in <emph>2 Thess. 2:3</emph> is the corrupt and
impious Judaism of the apostolic age. This had its seat in the temple of God, but was
doomed to destruction when the Lord should come at the fall of Jerusalem. But
even this second fulfilment of the prophecy does not preclude a future and final fulfilment.
Broadus on Mat., page 480&mdash;In <emph>Isaiah 41:8</emph> to <emph>chapter 53</emph>, the predictions with regard
to <emph><q>the servant of Jehovah</q></emph> make a gradual transition from Israel to the Messiah, the former
alone being seen in <emph>41:8</emph>, the Messiah also appearing in <emph>42:1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></emph>, and Israel quite
sinking out of sight in <emph>chapter 53</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The most marked illustration of the double sense of prophecy however is to be found
in <emph>Matthew 24</emph> and <emph>25</emph>, especially <emph>24:34</emph> and <emph>25:31</emph>, where Christ's prophecy of the destruction
of Jerusalem passes into a prophecy of the end of the world. Adamson, The Mind
in Christ, 183&mdash;<q>To him history was the robe of God, and therefore a constant repetition
of positions really similar, kaleidoscopic combining of a few truths, as the facts
varied in which they were to be embodied.</q> A. J. Gordon: <q>Prophecy has no sooner
become history, than history in turn becomes prophecy.</q> Lord Bacon: <q>Divine prophecies
have springing and germinant accomplishment through many ages, though the
height or fulness of them may refer to some one age.</q> In a similar manner there is
a manifoldness of meaning in Dante's Divine Comedy. C. E. Norton, Inferno, xvi&mdash;<q>The
narrative of the poet's spiritual journey is so vivid and consistent that it has all
the reality of an account of an actual experience; but within and beneath runs a stream
of allegory not less consistent and hardly less continuous than the narrative itself.</q>
A. H. Strong, The Great Poets and their Theology, 116&mdash;<q>Dante himself has told us that
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
there are four separate senses which he intends his story to convey. There are the literal,
the allegorical, the moral, and the analogical. In <emph>Psalm 114:1</emph> we have the words,
<emph><q>When Israel went forth out of Egypt.</q></emph> This, says the poet, may be taken literally, of the actual
deliverance of God's ancient people; or allegorically, of the redemption of the world
through Christ; or morally, of the rescue of the sinner from the bondage of his sin; or
anagogically, of the passage of both soul and body from the lower life of earth to the
higher life of heaven. So from Scripture Dante illustrates the method of his poem.</q>
See further, our treatment of Eschatology. See also Dr. Arnold of Rugby, Sermons on
the Interpretation of Scripture, Appendix A, pages 441-454; Aids to Faith, 449-462;
Smith's Bible Dict., 4:2727. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Elliott, Horæ Apocalypticæ, 4:662. Gardiner,
O. T. and N. T., 262-274, denies double sense, but affirms manifold applications of
a single sense. Broadus, on <emph>Mat. 24:1</emph>, denies double sense, but affirms the use of types.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The prophet was not always aware of the meaning of his own prophecies
(1 Pet. 1:11). It is enough to constitute his prophecies a proof of
divine revelation, if it can be shown that the correspondences between
them and the actual events are such as to indicate divine wisdom and purpose
in the giving of them&mdash;in other words, it is enough if the inspiring
Spirit knew their meaning, even though the inspired prophet did not.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It is not inconsistent with this view, but rather confirms it, that the near event, and
not the distant fulfilment, was often chiefly, if not exclusively, in the mind of the prophet
when he wrote. Scripture declares that the prophets did not always understand
their own predictions: <emph>1 Pet. 1:11&mdash;<q>searching what time or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ
which was in them did point unto, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glories that should follow
them.</q></emph> Emerson: <q>Himself from God he could not free; He builded better than he
knew.</q> Keble: <q>As little children lisp and tell of heaven, So thoughts beyond their
thoughts to those high bards were given.</q> Westcott: Preface to Com. on Hebrews,
vi&mdash;<q>No one would limit the teaching of a poet's words to that which was definitely
present to his mind. Still less can we suppose that he who is inspired to give a message
of God to all ages sees himself the completeness of the truth which all life serves
to illuminate.</q> Alexander McLaren: <q>Peter teaches that Jewish prophets foretold the
events of Christ's life and especially his sufferings; that they did so as organs of God's
Spirit; that they were so completely organs of a higher voice that they did not understand
the significance of their own words, but were wiser than they knew and had to
search what were the date and the characteristics of the strange things which they
foretold; and that by further revelation they learned that <emph><q>the vision is yet for many days</q> (Is.
24:22; Dan. 10:14)</emph>. If Peter was right in his conception of the nature of Messianic prophecy,
a good many learned men of to-day are wrong.</q> Matthew Arnold, Literature and
Dogma: <q>Might not the prophetic ideals be poetic dreams, and the correspondence
between them and the life of Jesus, so far as real, only a curious historical phenomenon?</q>
Bruce, Apologetics, 359, replies: <q>Such scepticism is possible only to those
who have no faith in a living God who works out purposes in history.</q> It is comparable
only to the unbelief of the materialist who regards the physical constitution of
the universe as explicable by the fortuitous concourse of atoms.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
8. <hi rend='italic'>Purpose of Prophecy&mdash;so far as it is yet unfulfilled.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Not to
enable us to map out the details of the future; but rather (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) To give general
assurance of God's power and foreseeing wisdom, and of the certainty
of his triumph; and (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) To furnish, after fulfilment, the proof that God
saw the end from the beginning.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Dan. 12:8, 9&mdash;<q>And I heard, but I understood not; then said I, O my Lord, what shall be the issue of these things?
And he said, Go thy way, Daniel; for the words are shut up and sealed till the time of the end</q></emph>; <emph>2 Pet. 1:19</emph>&mdash;prophecy
is <emph><q>a lamp shining in a dark place, until the day dawn</q></emph>&mdash;not until day dawns can distant
objects be seen; <emph>20&mdash;<q>no prophecy of scripture is of private interpretation</q></emph>&mdash;only God, by the event,
can interpret it. Sir Isaac Newton: <q>God gave the prophecies, not to gratify men's
curiosity by enabling them to foreknow things, but that after they were fulfilled they
might be interpreted by the event, and his own providence, not the interpreter's, be
thereby manifested to the world.</q> Alexander McLaren: <q>Great tracts of Scripture are
dark to us till life explains them, and then they come on us with the force of a new
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
revelation, like the messages which of old were sent by a strip of parchment coiled
upon a bâton and then written upon, and which were unintelligible unless the receiver
had a corresponding bâton to wrap them round.</q> A. H. Strong, The Great Poets and
their Theology, 23&mdash;<q>Archilochus, a poet of about 700 B. C., speaks of <q>a grievous <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>scytale</foreign></q>&mdash;the
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>scytale</foreign> being the staff on which a strip of leather for writing purposes was
rolled slantwise, so that the message inscribed upon the strip could not be read until the
leather was rolled again upon another staff of the same size; since only the writer and
the receiver possessed staves of the proper size, the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>scytale</foreign> answered all the ends of
a message in cypher.</q>
</p>

<p>
Prophecy is like the German sentence,&mdash;it can be understood only when we have
read its last word. A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 48&mdash;<q>God's providence is like
the Hebrew Bible; we must begin at the end and read backward, in order to understand
it.</q> Yet Dr. Gordon seems to assert that such understanding is possible even
before fulfilment: <q>Christ did not know the day of the end when here in his state of
humiliation; but he does know now. He has shown his knowledge in the Apocalypse,
and we have received <emph><q>The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him to show unto his servants, even the
things which must shortly come to pass</q> (Rev. 1:1)</emph>.</q> A study however of the multitudinous and
conflicting views of the so-called interpreters of prophecy leads us to prefer to Dr.
Gordon's view that of Briggs, Messianic Prophecies, 49&mdash;<q>The first advent is the resolver
of all Old Testament prophecy; ... the second advent will give the key to New
Testament prophecy. It is <emph><q>the Lamb that hath been slain</q> (Rev. 5:12)</emph> ... who alone opens
the sealed book, solves the riddles of time, and resolves the symbols of prophecy.</q>
</p>

<p>
Nitzsch: <q>It is the essential condition of prophecy that it should not disturb man's
relation to history.</q> In so far as this is forgotten, and it is falsely assumed that the
purpose of prophecy is to enable us to map out the precise events of the future before
they occur, the study of prophecy ministers to a diseased imagination and diverts
attention from practical Christian duty. Calvin: <q>Aut insanum inveniet aut faciet</q>;
or, as Lord Brougham translated it: <q>The study of prophecy either finds a man crazy,
or it leaves him so.</q> Second Adventists do not often seek conversions. Dr. Cumming
warned the women of his flock that they must not study prophecy so much as to neglect
their household duties. Paul has such in mind in <emph>2 Thess. 2:1, 2&mdash;<q>touching the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ ... that ye be not quickly shaken from your mind ... as that the day of the Lord is just at
hand</q></emph>; <emph>3:11&mdash;<q>For we hear of some that walk among you disorderly.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
9. <hi rend='italic'>Evidential force of Prophecy&mdash;so far as it is fulfilled.</hi> Prophecy,
like miracles, does not stand alone as evidence of the divine commission of
the Scripture writers and teachers. It is simply a corroborative attestation,
which unites with miracles to prove that a religious teacher has come
from God and speaks with divine authority. We cannot, however, dispense
with this portion of the evidences,&mdash;for unless the death and resurrection
of Christ are events foreknown and foretold by himself, as well as by the
ancient prophets, we lose one main proof of his authority as a teacher sent
from God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Stearns, Evidence of Christian Experience, 338&mdash;<q>The Christian's own life is the progressive
fulfilment of the prophecy that whoever accepts Christ's grace shall be born
again, sanctified, and saved. Hence the Christian can believe in God's power to predict,
and in God's actual predictions.</q> See Stanley Leathes, O. T. Prophecy, xvii&mdash;<q>Unless
we have access to the supernatural, we have no access to God.</q> In our discussions
of prophecy, we are to remember that before making the truth of Christianity
stand or fall with any particular passage that has been regarded as prediction, we must
be certain that the passage is meant as prediction, and not as merely figurative description.
Gladden, Seven Puzzling Bible Books, 195&mdash;<q>The book of Daniel is not a prophecy,&mdash;it
is an apocalypse.... The author [of such books] puts his words into the
mouth of some historical or traditional writer of eminence. Such are the Book of
Enoch, the Assumption of Moses, Baruch, 1 and 2 Esdras, and the Sibylline Oracles.
Enigmatic form indicates persons without naming them, and historic events as animal
forms or as operations of nature.... The book of Daniel is not intended to teach us
history. It does not look forward from the sixth century before Christ, but backward
from the second century before Christ. It is a kind of story which the Jews called
Haggada. It is aimed at Antiochus Epiphanes, who, from his occasional fits of melancholy,
was called Epimanes, or Antiochus the Mad.</q>
</p>

<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>

<p>
Whatever may be our conclusion as to the authorship of the book of Daniel, we
must recognize in it an element of prediction which has been actually fulfilled. The
most radical interpreters do not place its date later than 163 B. C. Our Lord sees in the
book clear reference to himself (<emph>Mat. 26:64&mdash;<q>the Son of man, sitting at the right hand of Power,
and coming on the clouds of heaven</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Dan. 7:13</emph>); and he repeats with emphasis certain predictions
of the prophet which were yet unfulfilled (<emph>Mat. 24:15&mdash;<q>When ye see the abomination of
desolation, which was spoken of through Daniel the prophet</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Dan. 9:27</emph>; <emph>11:31</emph>; <emph>12:11</emph>). The book of
Daniel must therefore be counted profitable not only for its moral and spiritual lessons,
but also for its actual predictions of Christ and of the universal triumph of his kingdom
(<emph>Dan. 2:45&mdash;<q>a stone cut out of the mountain without hands</q></emph>). See on Daniel, Hastings' Bible
Dictionary; Farrar, in Expositor's Bible. On the general subject see Annotated Paragraph
Bible, Introd. to Prophetical Books; Cairns, on Present State of Christian Argument
from Prophecy, in Present Day Tracts, 5: no. 27; Edersheim, Prophecy and History;
Briggs, Messianic Prophecy; Redford, Prophecy, its Nature and Evidence;
Willis J. Beecher, the Prophet and the Promise; Orr, Problem of the O. T., 455-465.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Having thus removed the presumption originally existing against miracles
and prophecy, we may now consider the ordinary laws of evidence
and determine the rules to be followed in estimating the weight of the
Scripture testimony.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>V. Principles of Historical Evidence applicable to the Proof of a Divine Revelation.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Principles of Historical Evidence applicable to the Proof of
a Divine Revelation</hi> (mainly derived from Greenleaf, Testimony of the
Evangelists, and from Starkie on Evidence).
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. As to documentary evidence.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Documents apparently ancient, not bearing upon their face the
marks of forgery, and found in proper custody, are presumed to be genuine
until sufficient evidence is brought to the contrary. The New Testament
documents, since they are found in the custody of the church, their natural
and legitimate depository, must by this rule be presumed to be genuine.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Christian documents were not found, like the Book of Mormon, in a cave, or
in the custody of angels. Martineau, Seat of Authority, 322&mdash;<q>The Mormon prophet,
who cannot tell God from devil close at hand, is well up with the history of both
worlds, and commissioned to get ready the second promised land.</q> Washington Gladden,
Who wrote the Bible?&mdash;<q>An angel appeared to Smith and told him where he would
find this book; he went to the spot designated and found in a stone box a volume six
inches thick, composed of thin gold plates, eight inches by seven, held together by
three gold rings; these plates were covered with writing, in the <q>Reformed Egyptian
tongue</q>; with this book were the <q>Urim and Thummim</q>, a pair of supernatural spectacles,
by means of which he was able to read and translate this <q>Reformed Egyptian</q>
language.</q> Sagebeer, The Bible in Court, 113&mdash;<q>If the ledger of a business firm has
always been received and regarded as a ledger, its value is not at all impeached if it is
impossible to tell which particular clerk kept this ledger.... The epistle to the
Hebrews would be no less valuable as evidence, if shown not to have been written by
Paul.</q> See Starkie on Evidence, 480 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Chalmers, Christian Revelation, in Works, 3:147-171.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Copies of ancient documents, made by those most interested in their
faithfulness, are presumed to correspond with the originals, even although
those originals no longer exist. Since it was the church's interest to have
faithful copies, the burden of proof rests upon the objector to the Christian
documents.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Upon the evidence of a copy of its own records, the originals having been lost, the
House of Lords decided a claim to the peerage; see Starkie on Evidence, 51. There is
no manuscript of Sophocles earlier than the tenth century, while at least two manuscripts
of the N. T. go back to the fourth century. Frederick George Kenyon, Handbook
to Textual Criticism of N. T.: <q>We owe our knowledge of most of the great
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
works of Greek and Latin literature&mdash;Æschylus, Sophocles, Thucydides, Horace,
Lucretius, Tacitus, and many more&mdash;to manuscripts written from 900 to 1500 years
after their authors' deaths; while of the N. T. we have two excellent and approximately
complete copies at an interval of only 250 years. Again, of the classical writers
we have as a rule only a few score of copies (often less), of which one or two stand out
as decisively superior to all the rest; but of the N. T. we have more than 3000 copies
(besides a very large number of versions), and many of these have distinct and independent
value.</q> The mother of Tischendorf named him Lobgott, because her fear
that her babe would be born blind had not come true. No man ever had keener sight
than he. He spent his life in deciphering old manuscripts which other eyes could not
read. The Sinaitic manuscript which he discovered takes us back within three centuries
of the time of the apostles.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) In determining matters of fact, after the lapse of considerable time,
documentary evidence is to be allowed greater weight than oral testimony.
Neither memory nor tradition can long be trusted to give absolutely correct
accounts of particular facts. The New Testament documents, therefore,
are of greater weight in evidence than tradition would be, even if only
thirty years had elapsed since the death of the actors in the scenes they
relate.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See Starkie on Evidence, 51, 730. The Roman Catholic Church, in its legends of the
saints, shows how quickly mere tradition can become corrupt. Abraham Lincoln was
assassinated in 1865, yet sermons preached to-day on the anniversary of his birth make
him out to be Unitarian, Universalist, or Orthodox, according as the preacher himself
believes.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. As to testimony in general.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) In questions as to matters of fact, the proper inquiry is not whether
it is possible that the testimony may be false, but whether there is sufficient
probability that it is true. It is unfair, therefore, to allow our examination
of the Scripture witnesses to be prejudiced by suspicion, merely because
their story is a sacred one.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
There must be no prejudice against, there must be open-mindedness to, truth; there
must be a normal aspiration after the signs of communication from God. Telepathy,
forty days fasting, parthenogenesis, all these might once have seemed antecedently
incredible. Now we see that it would have been more rational to admit their existence
on presentation of appropriate evidence.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) A proposition of fact is proved when its truth is established by competent
and satisfactory evidence. By competent evidence is meant such
evidence as the nature of the thing to be proved admits. By satisfactory
evidence is meant that amount of proof which ordinarily satisfies an
unprejudiced mind beyond a reasonable doubt. Scripture facts are therefore
proved when they are established by that kind and degree of evidence
which would in the affairs of ordinary life satisfy the mind and conscience
of a common man. When we have this kind and degree of evidence it is
unreasonable to require more.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In matters of morals and religion competent evidence need not be mathematical or
even logical. The majority of cases in criminal courts are decided upon evidence that
is circumstantial. We do not determine our choice of friends or of partners in life by
strict processes of reasoning. The heart as well as the head must be permitted a voice,
and competent evidence includes considerations arising from the moral needs of the
soul. The evidence, moreover, does not require to be demonstrative. Even a slight
balance of probability, when nothing more certain is attainable, may suffice to constitute
rational proof and to bind our moral action.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) In the absence of circumstances which generate suspicion, every
witness is to be presumed credible, until the contrary is shown; the burden
of impeaching his testimony lying upon the objector. The principle which
leads men to give true witness to facts is stronger than that which leads
them to give false witness. It is therefore unjust to compel the Christian
to establish the credibility of his witnesses before proceeding to adduce
their testimony, and it is equally unjust to allow the uncorroborated testimony
of a profane writer to outweigh that of a Christian writer. Christian
witnesses should not be considered interested, and therefore untrustworthy;
for they became Christians against their worldly interests, and because they
could not resist the force of testimony. Varying accounts among them
should be estimated as we estimate the varying accounts of profane writers.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
John's account of Jesus differs from that of the synoptic gospels; but in a very similar
manner, and probably for a very similar reason, Plato's account of Socrates differs
from that of Xenophon. Each saw and described that side of his subject which he was
by nature best fitted to comprehend,&mdash;compare the Venice of Canaletto with the Venice
of Turner, the former the picture of an expert draughtsman, the latter the vision of a
poet who sees the palaces of the Doges glorified by air and mist and distance. In Christ
there was a <emph><q>hiding of his power</q> (Hab. 3:4)</emph>; <emph><q>how small a whisper do we hear of him!</q> (Job 26:14)</emph>; he,
rather than Shakespeare, is <q>the myriad-minded</q>; no one evangelist can be expected
to know or describe him except <emph><q>in part</q> (1 Cor. 13:12)</emph>. Frances Power Cobbe, Life, 2:402&mdash;<q>All
of us human beings resemble diamonds, in having several distinct facets to our
characters; and, as we always turn one of these to one person and another to another,
there is generally some fresh side to be seen in a particularly brilliant gem.</q> E. P.
Tenney, Coronation, 45&mdash;<q>The secret and powerful life he [the hero of the story] was
leading was like certain solitary streams, deep, wide, and swift, which run unseen
through vast and unfrequented forests. So wide and varied was this man's nature, that
whole courses of life might thrive in its secret places,&mdash;and his neighbors might touch
him and know him only on that side on which he was like them.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) A slight amount of positive testimony, so long as it is uncontradicted,
outweighs a very great amount of testimony that is merely negative. The
silence of a second witness, or his testimony that he did not see a certain
alleged occurrence, cannot counterbalance the positive testimony of a first
witness that he did see it. We should therefore estimate the silence of profane
writers with regard to facts narrated in Scripture precisely as we should
estimate it if the facts about which they are silent were narrated by other
profane writers, instead of being narrated by the writers of Scripture.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Egyptian monuments make no mention of the destruction of Pharaoh and his army;
but then, Napoleon's dispatches also make no mention of his defeat at Trafalgar. At
the tomb of Napoleon in the Invalides of Paris, the walls are inscribed with names of
a multitude of places where his battles were fought, but Waterloo, the scene of his
great defeat, is not recorded there. So Sennacherib, in all his monuments, does not
refer to the destruction of his army in the time of Hezekiah. Napoleon gathered
450,000 men at Dresden to invade Russia. At Moscow the soft-falling snow conquered
him. In one night 20,000 horses perished with cold. Not without reason at Moscow, on
the anniversary of the retreat of the French, the exultation of the prophet over the
fall of Sennacherib is read in the churches. James Robertson, Early History of Israel,
395, note&mdash;<q>Whately, in his Historic Doubts, draws attention to the fact that the
principal Parisian journal in 1814, on the very day on which the allied armies entered
Paris as conquerors, makes no mention of any such event. The battle of Poictiers in
732, which effectually checked the spread of Mohammedanism across Europe, is not
once referred to in the monastic annals of the period. Sir Thomas Browne lived
through the Civil Wars and the Commonwealth, yet there is no syllable in his writings
with regard to them. Sale says that circumcision is regarded by Mohammedans as an
ancient divine institution, the rite having been in use many years before Mohammed,
yet it is not so much as once mentioned in the Koran.</q>
</p>

<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>

<p>
Even though we should grant that Josephus does not mention Jesus, we should have
a parallel in Thucydides, who never once mentions Socrates, the most important character
of the twenty years embraced in his history. Wieseler, however, in Jahrbuch f. d.
Theologie, 23:98, maintains the essential genuineness of the commonly rejected passage
with regard to Jesus in Josephus, Antiq., 18:3:3, omitting, however, as interpolations,
the phrases: <q>if it be right to call him man</q>; <q>this was the Christ</q>; <q>he appeared
alive the third day according to prophecy</q>; for these, if genuine, would prove Josephus
a Christian, which he, by all ancient accounts, was not. Josephus lived from A. D. 34
to possibly 114. He does elsewhere speak of Christ; for he records (20:9:1) that
Albinus <q>assembled the Sanhedrim of judges, and brought before them the brother of
Jesus who was called Christ, whose name was James, and some others ... and delivered
them to be stoned.</q> See Niese's new edition of Josephus; also a monograph on the subject
by Gustav Adolph Müller, published at Innsbruck, 1890. Rush Rhees, Life of Jesus
of Nazareth, 22&mdash;<q>To mention Jesus more fully would have required some approval of
his life and teaching. This would have been a condemnation of his own people whom
he desired to commend to Gentile regard, and he seems to have taken the cowardly
course of silence concerning a matter more noteworthy, for that generation, than
much else of which he writes very fully.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) <q>The credit due to the testimony of witnesses depends upon: first,
their ability; secondly, their honesty; thirdly, their number and the consistency
of their testimony; fourthly, the conformity of their testimony with
experience; and fifthly, the coincidence of their testimony with collateral
circumstances.</q> We confidently submit the New Testament witnesses to
each and all of these tests.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See Starkie on Evidence, 726.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Positive Proofs That The Scriptures Are A Divine
Revelation.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Genuineness of the Christian Documents.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Genuineness of the Christian Documents</hi>, or proof that the
books of the Old and New Testaments were written at the age to which they
are assigned and by the men or class of men to whom they are ascribed.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Our present discussion comprises the first part, and only the first part, of the doctrine
of the Canon (κανών, a measuring-reed; hence, a rule, a standard). It is important to
observe that the determination of the Canon, or list of the books of sacred Scripture,
is not the work of the church as an organized body. We do not receive these books
upon the authority of Fathers or Councils. We receive them, only as the Fathers and
Councils received them, because we have evidence that they are the writings of the
men, or class of men, whose names they bear, and that they are also credible and
inspired. If the previous epistle alluded to in <emph>1 Cor. 5:9</emph> should be discovered and be universally
judged authentic, it could be placed with Paul's other letters and could form
part of the Canon, even though it has been lost for 1800 years. Bruce, Apologetics,
321&mdash;<q>Abstractly the Canon is an open question. It can never be anything else on the
principles of Protestantism which forbid us to accept the decisions of church councils,
whether ancient or modern, as final. But practically the question of the Canon is
closed.</q> The Westminster Confession says that the authority of the word of God
<q>does not rest upon historic evidence; it does not rest upon the authority of Councils;
it does not rest upon the consent of the past or the excellence of the matter; but it rests
upon the Spirit of God bearing witness to our hearts concerning its divine authority.</q>
Clarke, Christian Theology, 24&mdash;<q>The value of the Scriptures to us does not depend
upon our knowing who wrote them. In the O. T. half its pages are of uncertain authorship.
New dates mean new authorship. Criticism is a duty, for dates of authorship
give means of interpretation. The Scriptures have power because God is in them, and
because they describe the entrance of God into the life of man.</q>
</p>

<p>
Saintine, Picciola, 782&mdash;<q>Has not a feeble reed provided man with his first arrow, his
first pen, his first instrument of music?</q> Hugh Macmillan: <q>The idea of stringed instruments
was first derived from the twang of the well strung bow, as the archer shot his
arrows; the lyre and the harp which discourse the sweetest music of peace were invented
by those who first heard this inspiring sound in the excitement of battle. And so there is
no music so delightful amid the jarring discord of the world, turning everything to
music and harmonizing earth and heaven, as when the heart rises out of the gloom of
anger and revenge, and converts its bow into a harp, and sings to it the Lord's song of
infinite forgiveness.</q> George Adam Smith, Mod. Criticism and Preaching of O. T., 5&mdash;<q>The
church has never renounced her liberty to revise the Canon. The liberty at the
beginning cannot be more than the liberty thereafter. The Holy Spirit has not forsaken
the leaders of the church. Apostolic writers nowhere define the limits of the
Canon, any more than Jesus did. Indeed, they employed extra-canonical writings.
Christ and the apostles nowhere bound the church to believe all the teachings of the
O. T. Christ discriminates, and forbids the literal interpretation of its contents. Many
of the apostolic interpretations challenge our sense of truth. Much of their exegesis
was temporary and false. Their judgment was that much in the O. T. was rudimentary.
This opens the question of development in revelation, and justifies the attempt to fix
the historic order. The N. T. criticism of the O. T. gives the liberty of criticism, and the
need, and the obligation of it. O. T. criticism is not, like Baur's of the N. T., the result
of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> Hegelian reasoning. From the time of Samuel we have real history. The
prophets do not appeal to miracles. There is more gospel in the book of Jonah, when
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
it is treated as a parable. The O. T. is a gradual ethical revelation of God. Few realize
that the church of Christ has a higher warrant for her Canon of the O. T. than she has
for her Canon of the N. T. The O. T. was the result of criticism in the widest sense of
that word. But what the church thus once achieved, the church may at any time
revise.</q>
</p>

<p>
We reserve to a point somewhat later the proof of the credibility and the inspiration
of the Scriptures. We now show their genuineness, as we would show the genuineness
of other religious books, like the Koran, or of secular documents, like Cicero's Orations
against Catiline. Genuineness, in the sense in which we use the term, does not necessarily
imply authenticity (<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, truthfulness and authority); see Blunt, Dict. Doct. and
Hist. Theol., art.: Authenticity. Documents may be genuine which are written in
whole or in part by persons other than they whose names they bear, provided these
persons belong to the same class. The Epistle to the Hebrews, though not written by
Paul, is genuine, because it proceeds from one of the apostolic class. The addition of Deut.
34, after Moses' death, does not invalidate the genuineness of the Pentateuch; nor would
the theory of a later Isaiah, even if it were established, disprove the genuineness of that
prophecy; provided, in both cases, that the additions were made by men of the prophetic
class. On the general subject of the genuineness of the Scripture documents, see
Alexander, McIlvaine, Chalmers, Dodge, and Peabody, on the Evidences of Christianity;
also Archibald, The Bible Verified.
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Genuineness of the Books of the New Testament.</head>

<p>
We do not need to adduce proof of the existence of the books of the New
Testament as far back as the third century, for we possess manuscripts of
them which are at least fourteen hundred years old, and, since the third
century, references to them have been inwoven into all history and literature.
We begin our proof, therefore, by showing that these documents not
only existed, but were generally accepted as genuine, before the close of
the second century.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Origen was born as early as 186 A. D.; yet Tregelles tells us that Origen's works contain
citations embracing two-thirds of the New Testament. Hatch, Hibbert Lectures,
12&mdash;<q>The early years of Christianity were in some respects like the early years of our
lives.... Those early years are the most important in our education. We learn
then, we hardly know how, through effort and struggle and innocent mistakes, to use
our eyes and ears, to measure distance and direction, by a process which ascends by
unconscious steps to the certainty which we feel in our maturity.... It was in some
such unconscious way that the Christian thought of the early centuries gradually
acquired the form which we find when it emerges as it were into the developed manhood
of the fourth century.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
A. All the books of the New Testament, with the single exception of
2 Peter, were not only received as genuine, but were used in more or less
collected form, in the latter half of the second century. These collections
of writings, so slowly transcribed and distributed, imply the long continued
previous existence of the separate books, and forbid us to fix their origin
later than the first half of the second century.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Tertullian (160-230) appeals to the <q>New Testament</q> as made up of
the <q>Gospels</q> and <q>Apostles.</q> He vouches for the genuineness of the four
gospels, the Acts, 1 Peter, 1 John, thirteen epistles of Paul, and the Apocalypse;
in short, to twenty-one of the twenty-seven books of our Canon.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Sanday, Bampton Lectures for 1893, is confident that the first three gospels took their
present shape before the destruction of Jerusalem. Yet he thinks the first and third
gospels of composite origin, and probably the second. Not later than 125 A. D. the four
gospels of our Canon had gained a recognized and exceptional authority. Andover
Professors, Divinity of Jesus Christ, 40&mdash;<q>The oldest of our gospels was written about
the year 70. The earlier one, now lost, a great part of which is preserved in Luke and
Matthew, was probably written a few years earlier.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The Muratorian Canon in the West and the Peshito Version in the
East (having a common date of about 160) in their catalogues of the New
Testament writings mutually complement each other's slight deficiencies,
and together witness to the fact that at that time every book of our present
New Testament, with the exception of 2 Peter, was received as genuine.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Hovey, Manual of Christian Theology, 50&mdash;<q>The fragment on the Canon, discovered
by Muratori in 1738, was probably written about 170 A. D., in Greek. It begins with
the last words of a sentence which must have referred to the Gospel of Mark, and proceeds
to speak of the Third Gospel as written by Luke the physician, who did not see the
Lord, and then of the Fourth Gospel as written by John, a disciple of the Lord, at the
request of his fellow disciples and his elders.</q> Bacon, N. T. Introduction, 50, gives the
Muratorian Canon in full; 30&mdash;<q>Theophilus of Antioch (181-190) is the first to cite a
gospel by name, quoting <emph>John 1:1</emph> as from <q>John, one of those who were vessels of the
Spirit.</q></q> On the Muratorian Canon, see Tregelles, Muratorian Canon. On the Peshito
Version, see Schaff, Introd. to Rev. Gk.-Eng. N. T., xxxvii; Smith's Bible Dict., pp.
3388, 3389.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The Canon of Marcion (140), though rejecting all the gospels but
that of Luke, and all the epistles but ten of Paul's, shows, nevertheless,
that at that early day <q>apostolic writings were regarded as a complete
original rule of doctrine.</q> Even Marcion, moreover, does not deny the
genuineness of those writings which for doctrinal reasons he rejects.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Marcion, the Gnostic, was the enemy of all Judaism, and regarded the God of the
O. T. as a restricted divinity, entirely different from the God of the N. T. Marcion was
<q>ipso Paulo paulinior</q>&mdash;<q>plus loyal que le roi.</q> He held that Christianity was something
entirely new, and that it stood in opposition to all that went before it. His
Canon consisted of two parts: the <q>Gospel</q> (Luke, with its text curtailed by omission
of the Hebraistic elements) and the Apostolicon (the epistles of Paul). The epistle to
Diognetus by an unknown author, and the epistle of Barnabas, shared the view of
Marcion. The name of the Deity was changed from Jehovah to Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. If Marcion's view had prevailed, the Old Testament would have been lost
to the Christian Church. God's revelation would have been deprived of its proof from
prophecy. Development from the past, and divine conduct of Jewish history, would
have been denied. But without the Old Testament, as H. W. Beecher maintained, the
New Testament would lack background; our chief source of knowledge with regard
to God's natural attributes of power, wisdom, and truth would be removed: the love
and mercy revealed in the New Testament would seem characteristics of a weak being,
who could not enforce law or inspire respect. A tree has as much breadth below ground
as there is above; so the O. T. roots of God's revelation are as extensive and necessary
as are its N. T. trunk and branches and leaves. See Allen, Religious Progress, 81;
Westcott, Hist. N. T. Canon, and art.: Canon, in Smith's Bible Dictionary. Also Reuss,
History of Canon; Mitchell, Critical Handbook, part I.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The Christian and Apostolic Fathers who lived in the first half of
the second century not only quote from these books and allude to them,
but testify that they were written by the apostles themselves. We are
therefore compelled to refer their origin still further back, namely, to the
first century, when the apostles lived.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Irenæus (120-200) mentions and quotes the four gospels by name,
and among them the gospel according to John: <q>Afterwards John, the
disciple of the Lord, who also leaned upon his breast, he likewise published
a gospel, while he dwelt in Ephesus in Asia.</q> And Irenæus was the disciple
and friend of Polycarp (80-166), who was himself a personal acquaintance
of the Apostle John. The testimony of Irenæus is virtually the
evidence of Polycarp, the contemporary and friend of the Apostle, that each
of the gospels was written by the person whose name it bears.
</p>

<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
To this testimony it is objected that Irenæus says there are four gospels because
there are four quarters of the world and four living creatures in the cherubim. But
we reply that Irenæus is here stating, not his own reason for accepting four and
only four gospels, but what he conceives to be God's reason for ordaining that there
should be four. We are not warranted in supposing that he accepted the four gospels
on any other ground than that of testimony that they were the productions of apostolic
men.
</p>

<p>
Chrysostom, in a similar manner, compares the four gospels to a chariot and four:
When the King of Glory rides forth in it, he shall receive the triumphal acclamations
of all peoples. So Jerome: God rides upon the cherubim, and since there are four
cherubim, there must be four gospels. All this however is an early attempt at the
philosophy of religion, and not an attempt to demonstrate historical fact. L. L. Paine,
Evolution of Trinitarianism, 319-367, presents the radical view of the authorship of
the fourth gospel. He holds that John the apostle died A. D. 70, or soon after, and
that Irenæus confounded the two Johns whom Papias so clearly distinguished&mdash;John
the Apostle and John the Elder. With Harnack, Paine supposes the gospel to have
been written by John the Elder, a contemporary of Papias. But we reply that the testimony
of Irenæus implies a long continued previous tradition. R. W. Dale, Living
Christ and Four Gospels, 145&mdash;<q>Religious veneration such as that with which Irenæus
regarded these books is of slow growth. They must have held a great place in the
Church as far back as the memory of living men extended.</q> See Hastings' Bible Dictionary,
2:695.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Justin Martyr (died 148) speaks of <q>memoirs (ἀπομνημονεύματα) of
Jesus Christ,</q> and his quotations, though sometimes made from memory,
are evidently cited from our gospels.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
To this testimony it is objected: (1) That Justin Martyr uses the term <q>memoirs</q>
instead of <q>gospels.</q> We reply that he elsewhere uses the term <q>gospels</q> and identifies
the <q>memoirs</q> with them: Apol., 1:66&mdash;<q>The apostles, in the memoirs composed by
them, which are called gospels,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, not memoirs, but gospels, was the proper title of
his written records. In writing his Apology to the heathen Emperors, Marcus Aurelius
and Marcus Antoninus, he chooses the term <q>memoirs</q>, or <q>memorabilia</q>, which Xenophon
had used as the title of his account of Socrates, simply in order that he may avoid
ecclesiastical expressions unfamiliar to his readers and may commend his writing to
lovers of classical literature. Notice that Matthew must be added to John, to justify
Justin's repeated statement that there were <q>memoirs</q> of our Lord <q>written by apostles,</q>
and that Mark and Luke must be added to justify his further statement that
these memoirs were compiled by <q>his apostles and those who followed them.</q> Analogous
to Justin's use of the word <q>memoirs</q> is his use of the term <q>Sunday</q>, instead of
Sabbath: Apol. 1:67&mdash;<q>On the day called Sunday, all who live in cities or in the country
gather together to one place, and the memoirs of the apostles or the writings of the
prophets are read.</q> Here is the use of our gospels in public worship, as of equal
authority with the O. T. Scriptures; in fact, Justin constantly quotes the words and acts
of Jesus' life from a written source, using the word γέγραπται. See Morison, Com. on
Mat., ix; Hemphill, Literature of Second Century, 234.
</p>

<p>
To Justin's testimony it is objected: (2) That in quoting the words spoken from heaven
at the Savior's baptism, he makes them to be: <q>My son, this day have I begotten
thee,</q> so quoting <emph>Psalm 2:7</emph>, and showing that he was ignorant of our present gospel,
<emph>Mat. 3:17</emph>. We reply that this was probably a slip of the memory, quite natural in
a day when the gospels existed only in the cumbrous form of manuscript rolls. Justin
also refers to the Pentateuch for two facts which it does not contain; but we should not
argue from this that he did not possess our present Pentateuch. The plays of Terence
are quoted by Cicero and Horace, and we require neither more nor earlier witnesses to
their genuineness,&mdash;yet Cicero and Horace wrote a hundred years after Terence. It
is unfair to refuse similar evidence to the gospels. Justin had a way of combining into
one the sayings of the different evangelists&mdash;a hint which Tatian, his pupil, probably
followed out in composing his Diatessaron. On Justin Martyr's testimony, see Ezra
Abbot, Genuineness of the Fourth Gospel, 49, note. B. W. Bacon, Introd. to N. T.,
speaks of Justin as <q>writing <hi rend='italic'>circa</hi> 155 A. D.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Papias (80-164), whom Irenæus calls a <q>hearer of John,</q> testifies
that Matthew <q>wrote in the Hebrew dialect the sacred oracles (τὰ λόγια),</q>
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
and that <q>Mark, the interpreter of Peter, wrote after Peter, (ὕστερον Πέτρῳ)
[or under Peter's direction], an unsystematic account (οὐ τάξει)</q> of the
same events and discourses.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
To this testimony it is objected: (1) That Papias could not have had our gospel of
Matthew, for the reason that this is Greek. We reply, either with Bleek, that Papias
erroneously supposed a Hebrew translation of Matthew, which he possessed, to be the
original; or with Weiss, that the original Matthew was in Hebrew, while our present
Matthew is an enlarged version of the same. Palestine, like modern Wales, was bilingual;
Matthew, like James, might write both Hebrew and Greek. While B. W. Bacon
gives to the writing of Papias a date so late as 145-160 A. D., Lightfoot gives that of 130
A. D. At this latter date Papias could easily remember stories told him so far back as 80
A. D., by men who were youths at the time when our Lord lived, died, rose and ascended.
The work of Papias had for its title Λογίων κυριακῶν ἐξήγησις&mdash;<q>Exposition of Oracles
relating to the Lord</q> = Commentaries on the Gospels. Two of these gospels were
Matthew and Mark. The view of Weiss mentioned above has been criticized upon the
ground that the quotations from the O. T. in Jesus' discourses in Matthew are all taken
from the Septuagint and not from the Hebrew. Westcott answers this criticism by suggesting
that, in translating his Hebrew gospel into Greek, Matthew substituted for his
own oral version of Christ's discourses the version of these already existing in the oral
common gospel. There was a common oral basis of true teaching, the <emph><q>deposit</q></emph>&mdash;τὴν
παραθήκην&mdash;committed to Timothy (<emph>1 Tim. 6:20</emph>; <emph>2 Tim. 1:12, 14</emph>), the same story told many
times and getting to be told in the same way. The narratives of Matthew, Mark and
Luke are independent versions of this apostolic testimony. First came belief; secondly,
oral teaching; thirdly, written gospels. That the original gospel was in Aramaic
seems probable from the fact that the Oriental name for <emph><q>tares,</q></emph> <foreign rend='italic'>zawān</foreign>, (<emph>Mat. 13:25</emph>)
has been transliterated into Greek, ζιζάνια. Morison, Com. on Mat., thinks that Matthew
originally wrote in Hebrew a collection of Sayings of Jesus Christ, which the Nazarenes
and Ebionites added to, partly from tradition, and partly from translating his full gospel,
till the result was the so-called Gospel of the Hebrews; but that Matthew wrote his
own gospel in Greek after he had written the Sayings in Hebrew. Professor W. A.
Stevens thinks that Papias probably alluded to the original autograph which Matthew
wrote in Aramaic, but which he afterwards enlarged and translated into Greek. See
Hemphill, Literature of the Second Century, 267.
</p>

<p>
To the testimony of Papias it is also objected: (2) That Mark is the most systematic
of all evangelists, presenting events as a true annalist, in chronological order. We
reply that while, so far as chronological order is concerned, Mark is systematic, so far
as logical order is concerned he is the most unsystematic of the evangelists, showing
little of the power of historical grouping which is so discernible in Matthew. Matthew
aimed to portray a life, rather than to record a chronology. He groups Jesus'
teachings in chapters 5, 6, and 7; his miracles in chapters 8 and 9; his directions to the
apostles in chapter 10; chapters 11 and 12 describe the growing opposition; chapter 13
meets this opposition with his parables; the remainder of the gospel describes our
Lord's preparation for his death, his progress to Jerusalem, the consummation of his
work in the Cross and in the resurrection. Here is true system, a philosophical arrangement
of material, compared with which the method of Mark is eminently unsystematic.
Mark is a Froissart, while Matthew has the spirit of J. R. Green. See Bleek, Introd.
to N. T., 1:108, 126; Weiss, Life of Jesus, 1:27-39.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The Apostolic Fathers,&mdash;Clement of Rome (died 101), Ignatius of
Antioch (martyred 115), and Polycarp (80-166),&mdash;companions and friends
of the apostles, have left us in their writings over one hundred quotations
from or allusions to the New Testament writings, and among these every
book, except four minor epistles (2 Peter, Jude, 2 and 3 John) is represented.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Although these are single testimonies, we must remember that they are the testimonies
of the chief men of the churches of their day, and that they express the opinion
of the churches themselves. <q>Like banners of a hidden army, or peaks of a
distant mountain range, they represent and are sustained by compact, continuous
bodies below.</q> In an article by P. W. Calkins, McClintock and Strong's Encyclopædia,
1:315-317, quotations from the Apostolic Fathers in great numbers are put side by
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
side with the New Testament passages from which they quote or to which they allude.
An examination of these quotations and allusions convinces us that these Fathers
were in possession of all the principal books of our New Testament. See Ante-Nicene
Library of T. and T. Clark; Thayer, in Boston Lectures for 1871:324; Nash, Ethics and
Revelation, 11&mdash;<q>Ignatius says to Polycarp: <q>The times call for thee, as the winds call
for the pilot.</q> So do the times call for reverent, fearless scholarship in the church.</q>
Such scholarship, we are persuaded, has already demonstrated the genuineness of the
N. T. documents.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) In the synoptic gospels, the omission of all mention of the fulfilment
of Christ's prophecies with regard to the destruction of Jerusalem is
evidence that these gospels were written before the occurrence of that
event. In the Acts of the Apostles, universally attributed to Luke, we have
an allusion to <q>the former treatise</q>, or the gospel by the same author, which
must, therefore, have been written before the end of Paul's first imprisonment
at Rome, and probably with the help and sanction of that apostle.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Acts 1:1&mdash;<q>The former treatise I made, O Theophilus, concerning all that Jesus began both to do and to teach.</q></emph>
If the Acts was written A. D. 63, two years after Paul's arrival at Rome, then <emph><q>the former
treatise,</q></emph> the gospel according to Luke, can hardly be dated later than 60; and since
the destruction of Jerusalem took place in 70, Matthew and Mark must have published
their gospels at least as early as the year 68, when multitudes of men were still living
who had been eye-witnesses of the events of Jesus' life. Fisher, Nature and Method
of Revelation, 180&mdash;<q>At any considerably later date [than the capture of Jerusalem]
the apparent conjunction of the fall of the city and the temple with the Parousia
would have been avoided or explained.... Matthew, in its present form, appeared
after the beginning of the mortal struggle of the Romans with the Jews, or between
65 and 70. Mark's gospel was still earlier. The language of the passages relative to the
Parousia, in Luke, is consistent with the supposition that he wrote after the fall of
Jerusalem, but not with the supposition that it was long after.</q> See Norton, Genuineness
of the Gospels; Alford, Greek Testament, Prolegomena, 30, 31, 36, 45-47.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. It is to be presumed that this acceptance of the New Testament documents
as genuine, on the part of the Fathers of the churches, was for
good and sufficient reasons, both internal and external, and this presumption
is corroborated by the following considerations:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) There is evidence that the early churches took every care to assure
themselves of the genuineness of these writings before they accepted them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Evidences of care are the following:&mdash;Paul, in <emph>2 Thess. 2:2</emph>, urged the churches to use
care, <emph><q>to the end that ye be not quickly shaken from your mind, nor yet be troubled, either by spirit, or by word,
or by epistle as from us</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 5:9&mdash;<q>I wrote unto you in my epistle to have no company with fornicators</q></emph>; <emph>Col.
4:16&mdash;<q>when this epistle hath been read among you, cause that it be read also in the church of the Laodiceans; and
that ye also read the epistle from Laodicea.</q></emph> Melito (169), Bishop of Sardis, who wrote a treatise on
the Revelation of John, went as far as Palestine to ascertain on the spot the facts relating
to the Canon of the O. T., and as a result of his investigations excluded the Apocrypha.
Ryle, Canon of O. T., 203&mdash;<q>Melito, the Bishop of Sardis, sent to a friend a list
of the O. T. Scriptures which he professed to have obtained from accurate inquiry,
while traveling in the East, in Syria. Its contents agree with those of the Hebrew
Canon, save in the omission of Esther.</q> Serapion, Bishop of Antioch (191-213, Abbot),
says: <q>We receive Peter and other apostles as Christ, but as skilful men we reject
those writings which are falsely ascribed to them.</q> Geo. H. Ferris, Baptist Congress,
1899:94&mdash;<q>Serapion, after permitting the reading of the Gospel of Peter in public services,
finally decided against it, not because he thought there could be no fifth gospel,
but because he thought it was not written by Peter.</q> Tertullian (160-230) gives an
example of the deposition of a presbyter in Asia Minor for publishing a pretended work
of Paul; see Tertullian, De Baptismo, referred to by Godet on John, Introduction;
Lardner, Works, 2:304, 305; McIlvaine, Evidences, 92.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The style of the New Testament writings, and their complete correspondence
with all we know of the lands and times in which they profess
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
to have been written, affords convincing proof that they belong to the
apostolic age.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Notice the mingling of Latin and Greek, as in σπεκουλάτωρ (<emph>Mark 6:27</emph>) and κεντυρίων
(<emph>Mark 15:39</emph>); of Greek and Aramæan, as in πρασιαὶ πρασιαί (<emph>Mark 6:40</emph>) and βδέλυγμα τῆς
ἐρημώσεως (<emph>Mat. 24:15</emph>); this could hardly have occurred after the first century. Compare
the anachronisms of style and description in Thackeray's <q>Henry Esmond,</q>
which, in spite of the author's special studies and his determination to exclude all words
and phrases that had originated in his own century, was marred by historical errors
that Macaulay in his most remiss moments would hardly have made. James Russell
Lowell told Thackeray that <q>different to</q> was not a century old. <q>Hang it, no!</q>
replied Thackeray. In view of this failure, on the part of an author of great literary
skill, to construct a story purporting to be written a century before his time and that
could stand the test of historical criticism, we may well regard the success of our gospels
in standing such tests as a practical demonstration that they were written in, and
not after, the apostolic age. See Alexander, Christ and Christianity, 27-37; Blunt,
Scriptural Coincidences, 244-354.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The genuineness of the fourth gospel is confirmed by the fact that
Tatian (155-170), the Assyrian, a disciple of Justin, repeatedly quoted it
without naming the author, and composed a Harmony of our four gospels
which he named the Diatessaron; while Basilides (130) and Valentinus
(150), the Gnostics, both quote from it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The sceptical work entitled <q>Supernatural Religion</q> said in 1874; <q>No one seems to
have seen Tatian's Harmony, probably for the very simple reason that there was no
such work</q>; and <q>There is no evidence whatever connecting Tatian's Gospel with
those of our Canon.</q> In 1876, however, there was published in a Latin form in Venice
the Commentary of Ephraem Syrus on Tatian, and the commencement of it was: <emph><q>In the
beginning was the Word</q> (John 1:1)</emph>. In 1888, the Diatessaron itself was published in Rome in
the form of an Arabic translation made in the eleventh century from the Syriac. J.
Rendel Harris, in Contemp. Rev., 1893:800 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, says that the recovery of Tatian's Diatessaron
has indefinitely postponed the literary funeral of St. John. Advanced critics, he
intimates, are so called, because they run ahead of the facts they discuss. The gospels
must have been well established in the Christian church when Tatian undertook to combine
them. Mrs. A. S. Lewis, in S. S. Times, Jan. 23, 1904&mdash;<q>The gospels were translated
into Syriac before A. D. 160. It follows that the Greek document from which
they were translated was older still, and since the one includes the gospel of St. John,
so did the other.</q> Hemphill, Literature of the Second Century, 183-231, gives the birth
of Tatian about 120, and the date of his Diatessaron as 172 A. D.
</p>

<p>
The difference in style between the Revelation and the gospel of John is due to the
fact that the Revelation was written during John's exile in Patmos, under Nero, in 67
or 68, soon after John had left Palestine and had taken up his residence at Ephesus. He
had hitherto spoken Aramæan, and Greek was comparatively unfamiliar to him. The
gospel was written thirty years after, probably about 97, when Greek had become to
him like a mother tongue. See Lightfoot on Galatians, 343, 347; <hi rend='italic'>per contra</hi>, see Milligan,
Revelation of St. John. Phrases and ideas which indicate a common authorship of the
Revelation and the gospel are the following: <emph><q>the Lamb of God,</q></emph> <emph><q>the Word of God,</q></emph> <emph><q>the True</q></emph>
as an epithet applied to Christ, <emph><q>the Jews</q></emph> as enemies of God, <emph><q>manna,</q></emph> <emph><q>him whom they pierced</q></emph>;
see Elliott, Horæ Apocalypticæ, 1:4, 5. In the fourth gospel we have ἀμνός, in Apoc. ἀρνίον,
perhaps better to distinguish <emph><q>the Lamb</q></emph> from the diminutive τὸ θηρίον, <emph><q>the beast.</q></emph> Common
to both Gospel and Rev. are ποιεῖν, <emph><q>to do</q></emph> [the truth]; περιπατεῖν, of moral conduct;
ἀληθινός, <emph><q>genuine</q></emph>; διψᾷν, πεινᾷν, of the higher wants of the soul; σκηνοῦν ἐν,
ποιμαίνειν, ὁδηγεῖν; also <emph><q>overcome,</q></emph> <emph><q>testimony,</q></emph> <emph><q>Bridegroom,</q></emph> <emph><q>Shepherd,</q></emph> <emph><q>Water of life.</q></emph> In the Revelation
there are grammatical solecisms: nominative for genitive, 1:4&mdash;ἀπὸ ὁ ὤν; nominative
for accusative, 7:9&mdash;εἶδον ... ὄχλος πολύς; accusative for nominative, 20:2&mdash;τὸν
δράκοντα ὁ ὄφις. Similarly we have in <emph>Rom. 12:5</emph>&mdash;τὸ δὲ καθ᾽ εἶς instead of τὸ δὲ καθ᾽ ἕνα,
where κατὰ has lost its regimen&mdash;a frequent solecism in later Greek writers; see Godet
on John, 1:269, 270. Emerson reminded Jones Very that the Holy Ghost surely writes
good grammar. The Apocalypse seems to show that Emerson was wrong.
</p>

<p>
The author of the fourth gospel speaks of John in the third person, <q>and scorned to
blot it with a name.</q> But so does Cæsar speak of himself in his Commentaries. Harnack
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
regards both the fourth gospel and the Revelation as the work of John the Presbyter
or Elder, the former written not later than about 110 A. D.; the latter from 93 to
96, but being a revision of one or more underlying Jewish apocalypses. Vischer has
expounded this view of the Revelation; and Porter holds substantially the same, in his
article on the Book of Revelation in Hastings' Bible Dictionary, 4:239-266. <q>It is the
obvious advantage of the Vischer-Harnack hypothesis that it places the original work
under Nero and its revised and Christianized edition under Domitian.</q> (Sanday, Inspiration,
371, 372, nevertheless dismisses this hypothesis as raising worse difficulties than it
removes. He dates the Apocalypse between the death of Nero and the destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus.) Martineau, Seat of Authority, 227, presents the moral objections
to the apostolic authorship, and regards the Revelation, from chapter 4:1 to 22:5, as a
purely Jewish document of the date 66-70, supplemented and revised by a Christian,
and issued not earlier than 136: <q>How strange that we should ever have thought it
possible for a personal attendant upon the ministry of Jesus to write or edit a book
mixing up fierce Messianic conflicts, in which, with the sword, the gory garment,
the blasting flame, the rod of iron, as his emblems, he leads the war-march, and
treads the winepress of the wrath of God until the deluge of blood rises to the horses'
bits, with the speculative Christology of the second century, without a memory of his
life, a feature of his look, a word from his voice, or a glance back at the hillsides of
Galilee, the courts of Jerusalem, the road to Bethany, on which his image must be forever
seen!</q>
</p>

<p>
The force of this statement, however, is greatly broken if we consider that the apostle
John, in his earlier days, was one of the <emph><q>Boanerges, which is, Sons of thunder</q> (Mark 3:17)</emph>,
but became in his later years the apostle of love: <emph>1 John 4:7&mdash;<q>Beloved, let us love one another,
for love is of God.</q></emph> The likeness of the fourth gospel to the epistle, which latter was
undoubtedly the work of John the apostle, indicates the same authorship for the gospel.
Thayer remarks that <q>the discovery of the gospel according to Peter sweeps away
half a century of discussion. Brief as is the recovered fragment, it attests indubitably
all four of our canonical books.</q> Riddle, in Popular Com., 1:25&mdash;<q>If a forger wrote
the fourth gospel, then Beelzebub has been casting out devils for these eighteen hundred
years.</q> On the genuineness of the fourth gospel, see Bleek, Introd. to N. T., 1:250;
Fisher, Essays on Supernat. Origin of Christianity, 33, also Beginnings of Christianity,
320-362, and Grounds of Theistic and Christian Belief, 245-309; Sanday, Authorship
of the Fourth Gospel, Gospels in the Second Century, and Criticism of the Fourth
Gospel; Ezra Abbott, Genuineness of the Fourth Gospel, 52, 80-87; Row, Bampton Lectures
on Christian Evidences, 249-287; British Quarterly, Oct. 1872:216; Godet, in Present
Day Tracts, 5: no. 25; Westcott, in Bib. Com. on John's Gospel, Introd., xxviii-xxxii;
Watkins, Bampton Lectures for 1890; W. L. Ferguson, in Bib. Sac., 1896:1-27.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The epistle to the Hebrews appears to have been accepted during
the first century after it was written (so Clement of Borne, Justin Martyr,
and the Peshito Version witness). Then for two centuries, especially in
the Roman and North African churches, and probably because its internal
characteristics were inconsistent with the tradition of a Pauline authorship,
its genuineness was doubted (so Tertullian, Cyprian, Irenæus, Muratorian
Canon). At the end of the fourth century, Jerome examined the evidence
and decided in its favor; Augustine did the same; the third Council of
Carthage formally recognized it (397); from that time the Latin churches
united with the East in receiving it, and thus the doubt was finally and
forever removed.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Epistle to the Hebrews, the style of which is so unlike that of the Apostle Paul,
was possibly written by Apollos, who was an Alexandrian Jew, <emph><q>a learned man</q></emph> and
<emph><q>mighty in the Scriptures</q> (Acts 18:24)</emph>; but it may notwithstanding have been written at the
suggestion and under the direction of Paul, and so be essentially Pauline. A. C.
Kendrick, in American Commentary on Hebrews, points out that while the style of
Paul is prevailingly dialectic, and only in rapt moments becomes rhetorical or poetic,
the style of the Epistle to the Hebrews is prevailingly rhetorical, is free from anacolutha,
and is always dominated by emotion. He holds that these characteristics
point to Apollos as its author. Contrast also Paul's method of quoting the O. T.: <emph><q>it
is written</q> (Rom. 11:8; 1 Cor. 1:31; Gal. 3:10)</emph> with that of the Hebrews: <emph><q>he saith</q> (8:5, 13)</emph>, <emph><q>he
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
hath said</q> (4:4)</emph>. Paul quotes the O. T. fifty or sixty times, but never in this latter way.
<emph>Heb. 2:3&mdash;<q>which having at the first been spoken by the Lord, was confirmed unto us by them that heard</q></emph>&mdash;shows
that the writer did not receive the gospel at first hand. Luther and Calvin rightly saw
in this a decisive proof that Paul was not the author, for he always insisted on the
primary and independent character of his gospel. Harnack formerly thought the
epistle written by Barnabas to Christians at Rome, A. D. 81-96. More recently however
he attributes it to Priscilla, the wife of Aquila, or to their joint authorship. The
majesty of its diction, however, seems unfavorable to this view. William T. C. Hanna:
<q>The words of the author ... are marshalled grandly, and move with the tread
of an army, or with the swell of a tidal wave</q>; see Franklin Johnson, Quotations in
N. T. from O. T., xii. Plumptre, Introd. to N. T., 37, and in Expositor, Vol. I, regards
the author of this epistle as the same with that of the Apocryphal Wisdom of Solomon,
the latter being composed before, the former after, the writer's conversion to Christianity.
Perhaps our safest conclusion is that of Origen: <q>God only knows who
wrote it.</q> Harnack however remarks: <q>The time in which our ancient Christian
literature, the N. T. included, was considered as a web of delusions and falsifications,
is past. The oldest literature of the church is, in its main points, and in most of its
details, true and trustworthy.</q> See articles on Hebrews, in Smith's and in Hastings'
Bible Dictionaries.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) As to 2 Peter, Jude, and 2 and 3 John, the epistles most frequently
held to be spurious, we may say that, although we have no conclusive
external evidence earlier than A. D. 160, and in the case of 2 Peter none
earlier than A. D. 230-250, we may fairly urge in favor of their genuineness
not only their internal characteristics of literary style and moral value,
but also the general acceptance of them all since the third century as the
actual productions of the men or class of men whose names they bear.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Firmilianus (250), Bishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia, is the first clear witness to 2 Peter.
Origen (230) names it, but, in naming it, admits that its genuineness is questioned.
The Council of Laodicea (372) first received it into the Canon. With this very gradual
recognition and acceptance of 2 Peter, compare the loss of the later works of Aristotle
for a hundred and fifty years after his death, and their recognition as genuine so soon
as they were recovered from the cellar of the family of Neleus in Asia; De Wette's
first publication of certain letters of Luther after the lapse of three hundred years,
yet without occasioning doubt as to their genuineness; or the concealment of Milton's
Treatise on Christian Doctrine, among the lumber of the State Paper Office in London,
from 1677 to 1823; see Mair, Christian Evidences, 95. Sir William Hamilton complained
that there were treatises of Cudworth, Berkeley and Collier, still lying unpublished
and even unknown to their editors, biographers and fellow metaphysicians, but yet of
the highest interest and importance; see Mansel, Letters, Lectures and Reviews, 381;
Archibald, The Bible Verified, 27. 2 Peter was probably sent from the East shortly
before Peter's martyrdom; distance and persecution may have prevented its rapid
circulation in other countries. Sagebeer, The Bible in Court, 114&mdash;<q>A ledger may
have been lost, or its authenticity for a long time doubted, but when once it is discovered
and proved, it is as trustworthy as any other part of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>res gestæ</foreign>.</q> See
Plumptre, Epistles of Peter, Introd., 73-81; Alford on 2 Peter, 4: Prolegomena, 157;
Westcott, on Canon, in Smith's Bib. Dict., 1:370, 373; Blunt, Dict. Doct. and Hist.
Theol., art.: Canon.
</p>

<p>
It is urged by those who doubt the genuineness of 2 Peter that the epistle speaks
of <emph><q>your apostles</q> (3:2)</emph>, just as <emph>Jude 17</emph> speaks of <emph><q>the apostles,</q></emph> as if the writer did not
number himself among them. But 2 Peter begins with <emph><q>Simon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus
Christ,</q></emph> and Jude, <emph><q>brother of James</q> (verse 1)</emph> was a brother of our Lord, but not an apostle.
Hovey, Introd. to N. T., xxxi&mdash;<q>The earliest passage manifestly based upon 2 Peter
appears to be in the so-called Second Epistle of the Roman Clement, 16:3, which
however is now understood to be a Christian homily from the middle of the second
century.</q> Origen (born 186) testifies that Peter left one epistle, <q>and perhaps a
second, for that is disputed.</q> He also says: <q>John wrote the Apocalypse, and an
epistle of very few lines; and, it may be, a second and a third; since all do not admit
them to be genuine.</q> He quotes also from James and from Jude, adding that their
canonicity was doubted.
</p>

<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>

<p>
Harnack regards 1 Peter, 2 Peter, James, and Jude, as written respectively about
160, 170, 130, and 130, but not by the men to whom they are ascribed&mdash;the ascriptions to
these authors being later additions. Hort remarks: <q>If I were asked, I should say that
the balance of the argument was against 2 Peter, but the moment I had done so I
should begin to think I might be in the wrong.</q> Sanday, Oracles of God, 73 note,
considers the arguments in favor of 2 Peter unconvincing, but also the arguments
against. He cannot get beyond a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non liquet</foreign>. He refers to Salmon, Introd. to N. T.,
529-559, ed. 4, as expressing his own view. But the later conclusions of Sanday are
more radical. In his Bampton Lectures on Inspiration, 348, 399, he says: 2 Peter <q>is
probably at least to this extent a counterfeit, that it appears under a name which is
not that of its true author.</q>
</p>

<p>
Chase, in Hastings' Bib. Dict., 3:806-817, says that <q>the first piece of <emph>certain</emph> evidence
as to 2 Peter is the passage from Origen quoted by Eusebius, though it hardly admits
of doubt that the Epistle was known to Clement of Alexandria.... We find no trace
of the epistle in the period when the tradition of apostolic days was still living.... It
was not the work of the apostle but of the second century ... put forward without
any sinister motive ... the personation of the apostle an obvious literary device rather
than a religious or controversial fraud. The adoption of such a verdict can cause perplexity
only when the Lord's promise of guidance to his Church is regarded as a charter
of infallibility.</q> Against this verdict we would urge the dignity and spiritual value
of 2 Peter&mdash;internal evidence which in our judgment causes the balance to incline in
favor of its apostolic authorship.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) Upon no other hypothesis than that of their genuineness can the
general acceptance of these four minor epistles since the third century, and
of all the other books of the New Testament since the middle of the second
century, be satisfactorily accounted for. If they had been mere collections
of floating legends, they could not have secured wide circulation as sacred
books for which Christians must answer with their blood. If they had been
forgeries, the churches at large could neither have been deceived as to
their previous non-existence, nor have been induced unanimously to pretend
that they were ancient and genuine. Inasmuch, however, as other
accounts of their origin, inconsistent with their genuineness, are now current,
we proceed to examine more at length the most important of these
opposing views.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The genuineness of the New Testament as a whole would still be demonstrable,
even if doubt should still attach to one or two of its books. It does not matter that
2nd Alcibiades was not written by Plato, or Pericles by Shakespeare. The Council of
Carthage in 397 gave a place in the Canon to the O. T. Apocrypha, but the Reformers
tore it out. Zwingli said of the Revelation: <q>It is not a Biblical book,</q> and Luther
spoke slightingly of the Epistle of James. The judgment of Christendom at large is
more trustworthy than the private impressions of any single Christian scholar. To
hold the books of the N. T. to be written in the second century by other than those
whose names they bear is to hold, not simply to forgery, but to a conspiracy of forgery.
There must have been several forgers at work, and, since their writings wonderfully
agree, there must have been collusion among them. Yet these able men have
been forgotten, while the names of far feebler writers of the second century have
been preserved.
</p>

<p>
G. F. Wright, Scientific Aspects of Christian Evidences, 343&mdash;<q>In civil law there are
<q>statutes of limitations</q> which provide that the general acknowledgment of a purported
fact for a certain period shall be considered as conclusive evidence of it. If,
for example, a man has remained in undisturbed possession of land for a certain number
of years, it is presumed that he has a valid claim to it, and no one is allowed to
dispute his claim.</q> Mair, Evidences, 99&mdash;<q>We probably have not a tenth part of the
evidence upon which the early churches accepted the N. T. books as the genuine productions
of their authors. We have only their verdict.</q> Wynne, in Literature of the
Second Century, 58&mdash;<q>Those who gave up the Scriptures were looked on by their fellow
Christians as <q>traditores,</q> traitors, who had basely yielded up what they ought to
have treasured as dearer than life. But all their books were not equally sacred. Some
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
were essential, and some were non-essential to the faith. Hence arose the distinction
between <emph>canonical</emph> and <emph>non-canonical</emph>. The general consciousness of Christians grew
into a distinct registration.</q> Such registration is entitled to the highest respect, and
lays the burden of proof upon the objector. See Alexander, Christ and Christianity,
Introduction; Hovey, General Introduction to American Commentary on N. T.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
D. Rationalistic Theories as to the origin of the gospels. These are
attempts to eliminate the miraculous element from the New Testament
records, and to reconstruct the sacred history upon principles of naturalism.
</p>

<p>
Against them we urge the general objection that they are unscientific in
their principle and method. To set out in an examination of the New Testament
documents with the assumption that all history is a mere natural
development, and that miracles are therefore impossible, is to make history
a matter, not of testimony, but of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> speculation. It indeed renders
any history of Christ and his apostles impossible, since the witnesses whose
testimony with regard to miracles is discredited can no longer be considered
worthy of credence in their account of Christ's life or doctrine.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In Germany, half a century ago, <emph><q>a man was famous according as he had lifted up axes upon the thick
trees</q> (Ps. 74:5, A. V.)</emph>, just as among the American Indians he was not counted a man who
could not show his scalps. The critics fortunately scalped each other; see Tyler, Theology
of Greek Poets, 79&mdash;on Homer. Nicoll, The Church's One Foundation, 15&mdash;<q>Like
the mummers of old, sceptical critics send one before them with a broom to sweep the
stage clear of everything for their drama. If we assume at the threshold of the gospel
study that everything of the nature of miracle is impossible, then the specific questions
are decided before the criticism begins to operate in earnest.</q> Matthew Arnold:
<q>Our popular religion at present conceives the birth, ministry and death of Christ as
altogether steeped in prodigy, brimful of miracle,&mdash;and <emph>miracles do not happen</emph>.</q> This
presupposition influences the investigations of Kuenen, and of A. E. Abbott, in his
article on the Gospels in the Encyc. Britannica. We give special attention to four of
the theories based upon this assumption.
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1st. The Myth-theory of Strauss (1808-1874).</head>

<p>
According to this view, the gospels are crystallizations into story of Messianic
ideas which had for several generations filled the minds of imaginative
men in Palestine. The myth is a narrative in which such ideas are
unconsciously clothed, and from which the element of intentional and
deliberate deception is absent.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This early view of Strauss, which has become identified with his name, was exchanged
in late years for a more advanced view which extended the meaning of the word
<q>myths</q> so as to include all narratives that spring out of a theological idea, and it
admitted the existence of <q>pious frauds</q> in the gospels. Baur, he says, first convinced
him that the author of the fourth gospel had <q>not unfrequently composed mere
fables, knowing them to be mere fictions.</q> The animating spirit of both the old view
and the new is the same. Strauss says: <q>We know with certainty what Jesus was <emph>not</emph>,
and what he has <emph>not</emph> done, namely, nothing superhuman and supernatural.</q> <q>No gospel
can claim that degree of historic credibility that would be required in order to make
us debase our reason to the point of believing miracles.</q> He calls the resurrection of
Christ <q>ein weltgeschichtlicher Humbug.</q> <q>If the gospels are really historical documents,
we cannot exclude miracle from the life-story of Jesus;</q> see Strauss, Life of
Jesus, 17; New Life of Jesus, 1: preface, xii. Vatke, Einleitung in A. T., 210, 211, distinguishes
the myth from the <emph>saga</emph> or legend: The criterion of the pure myth is that
the experience is impossible, while the <emph>saga</emph> is a tradition of remote antiquity; the
myth has in it the element only of belief, the <emph>saga</emph> has in it an element of history.
Sabatier, Philos. Religion, 37&mdash;<q>A myth is false in appearance only. The divine Spirit
can avail himself of the fictions of poetry as well as of logical reasonings. When the
heart was pure, the veils of fable always allowed the face of truth to shine through.
And does not childhood run on into maturity and old age?</q>
</p>

<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>

<p>
It is very certain that childlike love of truth was not the animating spirit of Strauss.
On the contrary, his spirit was that of remorseless criticism and of uncompromising hostility
to the supernatural. It has been well said that he gathered up all the previous
objections of sceptics to the gospel narrative and hurled them in one mass, just as
if some Sadducee at the time of Jesus' trial had put all the taunts and gibes, all the buffetings
and insults, all the shame and spitting, into one blow delivered straight into
the face of the Redeemer. An octogenarian and saintly German lady said unsuspectingly
that <q>somehow she never could get interested</q> in Strauss's Leben Jesu, which her
sceptical son had given her for religious reading. The work was almost altogether
destructive, only the last chapter suggesting Strauss's own view of what Jesus was.
</p>

<p>
If Luther's dictum is true that <q>the heart is the best theologian,</q> Strauss must be
regarded as destitute of the main qualification for his task. Encyc. Britannica, 22:592&mdash;<q>Strauss's
mind was almost exclusively analytical and critical, without depth of
religious feeling, or philosophical penetration, or historical sympathy. His work was
rarely constructive, and, save when he was dealing with a kindred spirit, he failed as a
historian, biographer, and critic, strikingly illustrating Goethe's profoundly true principle
that loving sympathy is essential for productive criticism.</q> Pfleiderer, Strauss's
Life of Jesus, xix&mdash;<q>Strauss showed that the church formed the mythical traditions
about Jesus out of its faith in him as the Messiah; but he did not show how the church
came by the faith that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah.</q> See Carpenter, Mental
Physiology, 362; Grote, Plato, 1:249.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We object to the Myth-theory of Strauss, that
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The time between the death of Christ and the publication of the
gospels was far too short for the growth and consolidation of such mythical
histories. Myths, on the contrary, as the Indian, Greek, Roman and
Scandinavian instances bear witness, are the slow growth of centuries.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The first century was not a century when such formation of myths
was possible. Instead of being a credulous and imaginative age, it was an
age of historical inquiry and of Sadduceeism in matters of religion.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Horace, in Odes 1:34 and 3:6, denounces the neglect and squalor of the heathen
temples, and Juvenal, Satire 2:150, says that <q>Esse aliquid manes et subterranea
regna Nec pueri credunt.</q> Arnold of Rugby: <q>The idea of men writing mythic histories
between the times of Livy and of Tacitus, and of St. Paul mistaking them for realities!</q>
Pilate's sceptical inquiry, <emph><q>What is truth?</q> (John 18:38)</emph>, better represented the age.
<q>The mythical age is past when an idea is presented abstractly&mdash;apart from narrative.</q>
The Jewish sect of the Sadducees shows that the rationalistic spirit was not
confined to Greeks or Romans. The question of John the Baptist, <emph>Mat. 11:3&mdash;<q>Art thou he
that cometh, or look we for another?</q></emph> and our Lord's answer, <emph>Mat. 11:4, 5&mdash;<q>Go and tell John the thing
which ye hear and see: the blind receive their sight ... the dead are raised up,</q></emph> show that the Jews expected
miracles to be wrought by the Messiah; yet <emph>John 10:41&mdash;<q>John indeed did no sign</q></emph> shows also
no irresistible inclination to invest popular teachers with miraculous powers; see
E. G. Robinson, Christian Evidences, 22; Westcott, Com. on John 10:41; Rogers, Superhuman
Origin of the Bible, 61; Cox, Miracles, 50.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The gospels cannot be a mythical outgrowth of Jewish ideas and
expectations, because, in their main features, they run directly counter to
these ideas and expectations. The sullen and exclusive nationalism of the
Jews could not have given rise to a gospel for all nations, nor could their
expectations of a temporal monarch have led to the story of a suffering
Messiah.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The O. T. Apocrypha shows how narrow was the outlook of the Jews. 2 Esdras 6:55,
56 says the Almighty has made the world <q>for <emph>our</emph> sakes</q>; other peoples, though
they <q>also come from Adam,</q> to the Eternal <q>are nothing, but be like unto spittle.</q>
The whole multitude of them are only, before him, <q>like a single foul drop that oozes
out of a cask</q> (C. Geikie, in S. S. Times). Christ's kingdom differed from that which
the Jews expected, both in its <emph>spirituality</emph> and its <emph>universality</emph> (Bruce, Apologetics,
3). There was no missionary impulse in the heathen world; on the other hand,
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
it was blasphemy for an ancient tribesman to make known his god to an outsider
(Nash, Ethics and Revelation, 106). The Apocryphal gospels show what sort of myths
the N. T. age would have elaborated: Out of a demoniac young woman Satan is said
to depart in the form of a young man (Bernard, in Literature of the Second Century,
99-136).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The belief and propagation of such myths are inconsistent with
what we know of the sober characters and self-sacrificing lives of the
apostles.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) The mythical theory cannot account for the acceptance of the
gospels among the Gentiles, who had none of the Jewish ideas and expectations.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) It cannot explain Christianity itself, with its belief in Christ's crucifixion
and resurrection, and the ordinances which commemorate these facts.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Witness Thomas's doubting, and Paul's shipwrecks and scourgings. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <emph>2 Pet. 1:16</emph>&mdash;οὐ
γὰρ σεσοφισμένοις μύθοις ἐξακολουθήσαντες = <q>we have not been on the false track
of myths artificially elaborated.</q> See F. W. Farrar, Witness of History to Christ, 49-88.
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) See the two books entitled: If the Gospel Narratives are Mythical,&mdash;What Then?
and, But How,&mdash;if the Gospels are Historic? (<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) As the existence of the American
Republic is proof that there was once a Revolutionary War, so the existence of
Christianity is proof of the death of Christ. The change from the seventh day to the
first, in Sabbath observance, could never have come about in a nation so Sabbatarian,
had not the first day been the celebration of an actual resurrection. Like the Jewish
Passover and our own Independence Day, Baptism and the Lord's Supper cannot be
accounted for, except as monuments and remembrances of historical facts at the
beginning of the Christian church. See Muir, on the Lord's Supper an abiding Witness
to the Death of Christ, In Present Day Tracts, 6: no. 36. On Strauss and his theory, see
Hackett, in Christian Rev., 48; Weiss, Life of Jesus, 155-163; Christlieb, Mod. Doubt and
Christ. Belief, 379-425; Maclear, in Strivings for the Faith, 1-136; H. B. Smith, in Faith
and Philosophy, 442-468; Bayne, Review of Strauss's New Life, in Theol. Eclectic, 4:74;
Row, in Lectures on Modern Scepticism, 305-360; Bibliotheca Sacra, Oct. 1871: art. by
Prof. W. A. Stevens; Burgess, Antiquity and Unity of Man, 263, 264; Curtis on Inspiration,
62-67; Alexander, Christ and Christianity, 92-126; A. P. Peabody, in Smith's
Bible Dict., 2:954-958.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2nd. The Tendency-theory of Baur (1792-1860).</head>

<p>
This maintains that the gospels originated in the middle of the second
century, and were written under assumed names as a means of reconciling
opposing Jewish and Gentile tendencies in the church. <q>These great
national tendencies find their satisfaction, not in events corresponding to
them, but in the elaboration of conscious fictions.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Baur dates the fourth gospel at 160-170 A. D.; Matthew at 130; Luke at 150; Mark at
150-160. Baur never inquires who Christ was. He turns his attention from the facts to
the documents. If the documents be proved unhistorical, there is no need of examining
the facts, for there are no facts to examine. He indicates the presupposition of his
investigations, when he says: <q>The principal argument for the later origin of the
gospels must forever remain this, that separately, and still more when taken together,
they give an account of the life of Jesus which involves impossibilities</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, miracles.
He would therefore remove their authorship far enough from Jesus' time to permit
regarding the miracles as inventions. Baur holds that in Christ were united the universalistic
spirit of the new religion, <emph>and</emph> the particularistic form of the Jewish Messianic
idea; some of his disciples laid emphasis on the one, some on the other; hence
first conflict, but finally reconciliation; see statement of the Tübingen theory and of
the way in which Baur was led to it, in Bruce, Apologetics, 360. E. G. Robinson interprets
Baur as follows: <q>Paul = Protestant; Peter = sacramentarian; James = ethical;
Paul + Peter + James = Christianity. Protestant preaching should dwell more on the
ethical&mdash;cases of conscience&mdash;and less on mere doctrine, such as regeneration and
justification.</q>
</p>

<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>

<p>
Baur was a stranger to the needs of his own soul, and so to the real character of the
gospel. One of his friends and advisers wrote, after his death, in terms that were
meant to be laudatory: <q>His was a completely objective nature. No trace of personal
needs or struggles is discernible in connection with his investigations of Christianity.</q>
The estimate of posterity is probably expressed in the judgment with regard to the
Tübingen school by Harnack: <q>The <emph>possible</emph> picture it sketched was not the <emph>real</emph>, and
the key with which it attempted to solve all problems did not suffice for the most
simple.... The Tübingen views have indeed been compelled to undergo very large
modifications. As regards the development of the church in the second century, it
may safely be said that the hypotheses of the Tübingen school have proved themselves
everywhere inadequate, very erroneous, and are to-day held by only a very few
scholars.</q> See Baur, Die kanonischen Evangelien; Canonical Gospels (Eng. transl.),
530; Supernatural Religion, 1:212-444 and vol. 2: Pfleiderer, Hibbert Lectures for 1885.
For accounts of Baur's position, see Herzog, Encyclopädie, art.: Baur; Clarke's transl.
of Hase's Life of Jesus, 34-36; Farrar, Critical History of Free Thought, 227, 228.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We object to the Tendency-theory of Baur, that
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The destructive criticism to which it subjects the gospels, if applied
to secular documents, would deprive us of any certain knowledge of the
past, and render all history impossible.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The assumption of artifice is itself unfavorable to a candid examination of the documents.
A perverse acuteness can descry evidences of a hidden <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>animus</foreign> in the most
simple and ingenuous literary productions. Instance the philosophical interpretation
of <q>Jack and Jill.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The antagonistic doctrinal tendencies which it professes to find in
the several gospels are more satisfactorily explained as varied but consistent
aspects of the one system of truth held by all the apostles.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Baur exaggerates the doctrinal and official differences between the leading apostles.
Peter was not simply a Judaizing Christian, but was the first preacher to the Gentiles,
and his doctrine appears to have been subsequently influenced to a considerable extent
by Paul's (see Plumptre on 1 Pet., 68-69). Paul was not an exclusively Hellenizing
Christian, but invariably addressed the gospel to the Jews before he turned to the Gentiles.
The evangelists give pictures of Jesus from different points of view. As the
Parisian sculptor constructs his bust with the aid of a dozen photographs of his subject,
all taken from different points of view, so from the four portraits furnished us by
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John we are to construct the solid and symmetrical life of
Christ. The deeper reality which makes reconciliation of the different views possible
is the actual historical Christ. Marcus Dods, Expositor's Greek Testament, 1:675&mdash;<q>They
are not two Christs, but one, which the four Gospels depict: diverse as the
profile and front face, but one another's complement rather than contradiction.</q>
</p>

<p>
Godet, Introd. to Gospel Collection, 272&mdash;Matthew shows the greatness of Jesus&mdash;his
full-length portrait; Mark his indefatigable activity; Luke his beneficent compassion;
John his essential divinity. Matthew first wrote Aramæan Logia. This was
translated into Greek and completed by a narrative of the ministry of Jesus for the
Greek churches founded by Paul. This translation was not made by Matthew and did
not make use of Mark (217-224). E. D. Burton: Matthew = fulfilment of past prophecy;
Mark = manifestation of present power. Matthew is argument from prophecy; Mark
is argument from miracle. Matthew, as prophecy, made most impression on Jewish
readers; Mark, as power, was best adapted to Gentiles. Prof. Burton holds Mark to be
based upon oral tradition alone; Matthew upon his Logia (his real earlier Gospel) and
other fragmentary notes; while Luke has a fuller origin in manuscripts and in Mark.
See Aids to the Study of German Theology, 148-155; F. W. Farrar, Witness of History
to Christ, 61.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It is incredible that productions of such literary power and lofty
religious teaching as the gospels should have sprung up in the middle of
the second century, or that, so springing up, they should have been published
under assumed names and for covert ends.
</p>

<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The general character of the literature of the second century is illustrated by Ignatius's
fanatical desire for martyrdom, the value ascribed by Hermas to ascetic rigor,
the insipid allegories of Barnabas, Clement of Rome's belief in the phœnix, and the
absurdities of the Apocryphal Gospels. The author of the fourth gospel among the
writers of the second century would have been a mountain among mole-hills. Wynne,
Literature of the Second Century, 60&mdash;<q>The apostolic and the sub-apostolic writers differ
from each other as a nugget of pure gold differs from a block of quartz with veins
of the precious metal gleaming through it.</q> Dorner, Hist. Doct. Person Christ, 1:1:92&mdash;<q>Instead
of the writers of the second century marking an advance on the apostolic
age, or developing the germ given them by the apostles, the second century shows great
retrogression,&mdash;its writers were not able to retain or comprehend all that had been
given them.</q> Martineau, Seat of Authority, 291&mdash;<q>Writers not only barbarous in
speech and rude in art, but too often puerile in conception, passionate in temper, and
credulous in belief. The legends of Papias, the visions of Hermas, the imbecility of
Irenæus, the fury of Tertullian, the rancor and indelicacy of Jerome, the stormy intolerance
of Augustine, cannot fail to startle and repel the student; and, if he turns to the
milder Hippolytus, he is introduced to a brood of thirty heresies which sadly dissipate his
dream of the unity of the church.</q> We can apply to the writers of the second century
the question of R. G. Ingersoll in the Shakespeare-Bacon controversy: <q>Is it possible
that Bacon left the best children of his brain on Shakespeare's doorstep, and kept only
the deformed ones at home?</q> On the Apocryphal Gospels, see Cowper, in Strivings
for the Faith, 73-108.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The theory requires us to believe in a moral anomaly, namely, that
a faithful disciple of Christ in the second century could be guilty of fabricating
a life of his master, and of claiming authority for it on the ground
that the author had been a companion of Christ or his apostles.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>A genial set of Jesuitical religionists</q>&mdash;with mind and heart enough to write the
gospel according to John, and who at the same time have cold-blooded sagacity enough
to keep out of their writings every trace of the developments of church authority
belonging to the second century. The newly discovered <q>Teaching of the Twelve
Apostles,</q> if dating from the early part of that century, shows that such a combination
is impossible. The critical theories assume that one who knew Christ as a man
could not possibly also regard him as God. Lowrie, Doctrine of St. John, 12&mdash;<q>If St.
John wrote, it is not possible to say that the genius of St. Paul foisted upon the church
a conception which was strange to the original apostles.</q> Fairbairn has well shown
that if Christianity had been simply the ethical teaching of the human Jesus, it would
have vanished from the earth like the sects of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees; if
on the other hand it had been simply the Logos-doctrine, the doctrine of a divine
Christ, it would have passed away like the speculations of Plato or Aristotle; because
Christianity unites the idea of the eternal Son of God with that of the incarnate Son of
man, it is fitted to be and it has become an universal religion; see Fairbairn, Philosophy
of the Christian Religion, 4, 15&mdash;<q>Without the personal charm of the historical
Jesus, the œcumenical creeds would never have been either formulated or tolerated,
and without the metaphysical conception of Christ the Christian religion would long ago
have ceased to live.... It is not Jesus of Nazareth who has so powerfully entered into
history: it is the deified Christ who has been believed, loved and obeyed as the Savior
of the world.... The two parts of Christian doctrine are combined in the one name
<q>Jesus Christ.</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) This theory cannot account for the universal acceptance of the gospels
at the end of the second century, among widely separated communities
where reverence for writings of the apostles was a mark of orthodoxy,
and where the Gnostic heresies would have made new documents instantly
liable to suspicion and searching examination.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Abbot, Genuineness of the Fourth Gospel, 52, 80, 88, 89. The Johannine doctrine of
the Logos, if first propounded in the middle of the second century, would have ensured
the instant rejection of that gospel by the Gnostics, who ascribed creation, not to the
Logos, but to successive <q>Æons.</q> How did the Gnostics, without <q>peep or mutter,</q>
come to accept as genuine what had only in their own time been first sprung upon the
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
churches? While Basilides (130) and Valentinus (150), the Gnostics, both quote from
the fourth gospel, they do not dispute its genuineness or suggest that it was of recent
origin. Bruce, in his Apologetics, says of Baur <q>He believed in the all-sufficiency of
the Hegelian theory of development through antagonism. He saw tendency everywhere.
Anything additional, putting more contents into the person and teaching of
Jesus than suits the initial stage of development, must be reckoned spurious. If we
find Jesus in any of the gospels claiming to be a supernatural being, such texts can
with the utmost confidence be set aside as spurious, for such a thought could not
belong to the initial stage of Christianity.</q> But such a conception certainly existed in
the second century, and it directly antagonized the speculations of the Gnostics. F.
W. Farrar, on <emph>Hebrews 1:2</emph>&mdash;<q>The word <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>æon</foreign> was used by the later Gnostics to describe
the various emanations by which they tried at once to widen and to bridge over the
gulf between the human and the divine. Over that imaginary chasm John threw the
arch of the Incarnation, when he wrote: <emph><q>The Word became flesh</q> (John 1:14)</emph>.</q> A document
which so contradicted the Gnostic teachings could not in the second century have been
quoted by the Gnostics themselves without dispute as to its genuineness, if it had not
been long recognized in the churches as a work of the apostle John.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) The acknowledgment by Baur that the epistles to the Romans, Galatians
and Corinthians were written by Paul in the first century is fatal to
his theory, since these epistles testify not only to miracles at the period
at which they were written, but to the main events of Jesus' life and to the
miracle of his resurrection, as facts already long acknowledged in the
Christian church.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Baur, Paulus der Apostel, 276&mdash;<q>There never has been the slightest suspicion of
unauthenticity cast on these epistles (Gal., 1 and 2 Cor., Rom.), and they bear so incontestably
the character of Pauline originality, that there is no conceivable ground for
the assertion of critical doubts in their case.</q> Baur, in discussing the appearance of
Christ to Paul on the way to Damascus, explains the outward from the inward: Paul
translated intense and sudden conviction of the truth of the Christian religion into an
outward scene. But this cannot explain the hearing of the outward sound by Paul's
companions. On the evidential value of the epistles here mentioned, see Lorimer, in
Strivings for the Faith, 109-144; Howson, in Present Day Tracts, 4: no. 24; Row, Bampton
Lectures for 1877:289-356. On Baur and his theory in general, see Weiss, Life of
Jesus, 1:157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Christlieb, Mod. Doubt and Christ. Belief, 504-549; Hutton, Essays, 1:176-215;
Theol. Eclectic, 5:1-42; Auberlen, Div. Revelation; Bib. Sac., 19:75; Answers
to Supernatural Religion, in Westcott, Hist. N. T. Canon, 4th ed., Introd.; Lightfoot, in
Contemporary Rev., Dec. 1874, and Jan. 1875; Salmon, Introd. to N. T., 6-31; A. B.
Bruce, in Present Day Tracts, 7: no. 38.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3d. The Romance-theory of Renan (1823-1892).</head>

<p>
This theory admits a basis of truth in the gospels and holds that they
all belong to the century following Jesus' death. <q>According to</q> Matthew,
Mark, etc., however, means only that Matthew, Mark, etc., wrote
these gospels in substance. Renan claims that the facts of Jesus' life were
so sublimated by enthusiasm, and so overlaid with pious fraud, that the gospels
in their present form cannot be accepted as genuine,&mdash;in short, the
gospels are to be regarded as historical romances which have only a foundation
in fact.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>animus</foreign> of this theory is plainly shown in Renan's Life of Jesus, preface to 13th
ed.&mdash;<q>If miracles and the inspiration of certain books are realities, my method is
detestable. If miracles and the inspiration of books are beliefs without reality, my
method is a good one. But the question of the supernatural is decided for us with perfect
certainty by the single consideration that there is no room for believing in a thing
of which the world offers no experimental trace.</q> <q>On the whole,</q> says Renan, <q>I
admit as authentic the four canonical gospels. All, in my opinion, date from the first
century, and the authors are, generally speaking, those to whom they are attributed.</q>
He regards Gal., 1 and 2 Cor., and Rom., as <q>indisputable and undisputed.</q> He speaks
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
of them as <q>being texts of an absolute authenticity, of complete sincerity, and without
legends</q> (Les Apôtres, xxix; Les Évangiles, xi). Yet he denies to Jesus <q>sincerity
with himself</q>; attributes to him <q>innocent artifice</q> and the toleration of pious fraud,
as for example in the case of the stories of Lazarus and of his own resurrection. <q>To
conceive the good is not sufficient: it must be made to succeed; to accomplish this, less
pure paths must be followed.... Not by any fault of his own, his conscience lost
somewhat of its original purity,&mdash;his mission overwhelmed him.... Did he regret
his too lofty nature, and, victim of his own greatness, mourn that he had not remained
a simple artizan?</q> So Renan <q>pictures Christ's later life as a misery and a lie, yet he
requests us to bow before this sinner and before his superior, Sakya-Mouni, as demigods</q>
(see Nicoll, The Church's One Foundation, 62, 63). Of the highly wrought imagination
of Mary Magdalene, he says: <q>O divine power of love! sacred moments, in which
the passion of one whose senses were deceived gives us a resuscitated God!</q> See
Renan, Life of Jesus, 21.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
To this Romance-theory of Renan, we object that
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It involves an arbitrary and partial treatment of the Christian documents.
The claim that one writer not only borrowed from others, but
interpolated <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad libitum</foreign>, is contradicted by the essential agreement of the
manuscripts as quoted by the Fathers, and as now extant.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Renan, according to Mair, Christian Evidences, 153, dates Matthew at 84 A. D.; Mark
at 76; Luke at 94; John at 125. These dates mark a considerable retreat from the
advanced positions taken by Baur. Mair, in his chapter on Recent Reverses in Negative
Criticism, attributes this result to the late discoveries with regard to the Epistle of
Barnabas, Hippolytus's Refutation of all Heresies, the Clementine Homilies, and
Tatian's Diatessaron: <q>According to Baur and his immediate followers, we have less
than one quarter of the N. T. belonging to the first century. According to Hilgenfeld,
the present head of the Baur school, we have somewhat less than three quarters belonging
to the first century, while substantially the same thing may be said with regard to
Holzmann. According to Renan, we have distinctly more than three quarters of the
N. T. falling within the first century, and therefore within the apostolic age. This
surely indicates a very decided and extraordinary retreat since the time of Baur's grand
assault, that is, within the last fifty years.</q> We may add that the concession of authorship
within the apostolic age renders nugatory Renan's hypothesis that the N. T. documents
have been so enlarged by pious fraud that they cannot be accepted as trustworthy
accounts of such events as miracles. The oral tradition itself had attained so fixed a
form that the many manuscripts used by the Fathers were in substantial agreement in
respect to these very events, and oral tradition in the East hands down without serious
alteration much longer narratives than those of our gospels. The Pundita Ramabai
can repeat after the lapse of twenty years portions of the Hindu sacred books exceeding
in amount the whole contents of our Old Testament. Many cultivated men in
Athens knew by heart all the Iliad and the Odyssey of Homer. Memory and reverence
alike kept the gospel narratives free from the corruption which Renan supposes.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It attributes to Christ and to the apostles an alternate fervor of
romantic enthusiasm and a false pretense of miraculous power which are
utterly irreconcilable with the manifest sobriety and holiness of their lives
and teachings. If Jesus did not work miracles, he was an impostor.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
On Ernest Renan, His Life and the Life of Jesus, see A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation,
332-363, especially 356&mdash;<q>Renan attributes the origin of Christianity to the predominance
in Palestine of a constitutional susceptibility to mystic excitements. Christ is to
him the incarnation of sympathy and tears, a being of tender impulses and passionate
ardors, whose native genius it was to play upon the hearts of men. Truth or falsehood
made little difference to him; anything that would comfort the poor, or touch the finer
feelings of humanity, he availed himself of; ecstasies, visions, melting moods, these
were the secrets of his power. Religion was a beneficent superstition, a sweet delusion&mdash;excellent
as a balm and solace for the ignorant crowd, who never could be philosophers
if they tried. And so the gospel river, as one has said, is traced back to a fountain
of weeping men and women whose brains had oozed out at their eyes, and the perfection
of spirituality is made to be a sort of maudlin monasticism.... How different
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
from the strong and holy love of Christ, which would save men only by bringing
them to the truth, and which claims men's imitation only because, without love for God
and for the soul, a man is without truth. How inexplicable from this view the fact
that a pure Christianity has everywhere quickened the intellect of the nations, and
that every revival of it, as at the Reformation, has been followed by mighty forward
leaps of civilization. Was Paul a man carried away by mystic dreams and irrational
enthusiasms? Let the keen dialectic skill of his epistles and his profound grasp of the
great matters of revelation answer. Has the Christian church been a company of puling
sentimentalists? Let the heroic deaths for the truth suffered by the martyrs witness.
Nay, he must have a low idea of his kind, and a yet lower idea of the God who
made them, who can believe that the noblest spirits of the race have risen to greatness
by abnegating will and reason, and have gained influence over all ages by resigning
themselves to semi-idiocy.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It fails to account for the power and progress of the gospel, as a
system directly opposed to men's natural tastes and prepossessions&mdash;a
system which substitutes truth for romance and law for impulse.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 358&mdash;<q>And if the later triumphs of Christianity
are inexplicable upon the theory of Renan, how can we explain its founding? The
sweet swain of Galilee, beloved by women for his beauty, fascinating the unlettered
crowd by his gentle speech and his poetic ideals, giving comfort to the sorrowing and
hope to the poor, credited with supernatural power which at first he thinks it not
worth while to deny and finally gratifies the multitude by pretending to exercise,
roused by opposition to polemics and invective until the delightful young rabbi
becomes a gloomy giant, an intractable fanatic, a fierce revolutionist, whose denunciation
of the powers that be brings him to the Cross,&mdash;what is there in <emph>him</emph> to account
for the moral wonder which we call Christianity and the beginnings of its empire in the
world? Neither delicious pastorals like those of Jesus' first period, nor apocalyptic
fevers like those of his second period, according to Renan's gospel, furnish any rational
explanation of that mighty movement which has swept through the earth and has
revolutionized the faith of mankind.</q>
</p>

<p>
Berdoe, Browning, 47&mdash;<q>If Christ were not God, his life at that stage of the world's
history could by no possibility have had the vitalizing force and love-compelling power
that Renan's pages everywhere disclose. Renan has strengthened faith in Christ's
deity while laboring to destroy it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Renan, in discussing Christ's appearance to Paul on the way to Damascus, explains
the inward from the outward, thus precisely reversing the conclusion of Baur. A sudden
storm, a flash of lightning, a sudden attack of ophthalmic fever, Paul took as an
appearance from heaven. But we reply that so keen an observer and reasoner could not
have been thus deceived. Nothing could have made him the apostle to the Gentiles but
a sight of the glorified Christ and the accompanying revelation of the holiness of God,
his own sin, the sacrifice of the Son of God, its universal efficacy, the obligation laid
upon him to proclaim it to the ends of the earth. For reviews of Renan, see Hutton,
Essays, 261-281, and Contemp. Thought and Thinkers, 1:227-234; H. B. Smith, Faith and
Philosophy, 401-441; Christlieb, Mod. Doubt, 425-447; Pressensé, in Theol. Eclectic,
1:199; Uhlhorn, Mod. Representations of Life of Jesus, 1-33; Bib. Sac, 22:207; 23:353,
529; Present Day Tracts, 3: no. 16, and 4: no. 21; E. G. Robinson, Christian Evidences,
43-48; A. H. Strong, Sermon before Baptist World Congress, 1905.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>4th. The Development-theory of Harnack (born 1851).</head>

<p>
This holds Christianity to be a historical development from germs which
were devoid of both dogma and miracle. Jesus was a teacher of ethics,
and the original gospel is most clearly represented by the Sermon on the
Mount. Greek influence, and especially that of the Alexandrian philosophy,
added to this gospel a theological and supernatural element, and so
changed Christianity from a life into a doctrine.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Harnack dates Matthew at 70-75; Mark at 65-70; Luke at 78-93; the fourth gospel at
80-110. He regards both the fourth gospel and the book of Revelation as the works,
not of John the Apostle, but of John the Presbyter. He separates the prologue of the
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
fourth gospel from the gospel itself, and considers the prologue as a preface added
after its original composition in order to enable the Hellenistic reader to understand it.
<q>The gospel itself,</q> says Harnack, <q>contains no Logos-idea; it did not develop out of
a Logos-idea, such as flourished at Alexandria; it only connects itself with such an
idea. The gospel itself is based upon the historic Christ; he is the subject of all its
statements. This historical trait can in no way be dissolved by any kind of speculation.
The memory of what was actually historical was still too powerful to admit at this point
any Gnostic influences. The Logos-idea of the prologue is the Logos of Alexandrine
Judaism, the Logos of Philo, and it is derived ultimately from the 'Son of man' in the
book of Daniel.... The fourth gospel, which does not proceed from the Apostle
John and does not so claim, cannot be used as a historical source in the ordinary sense of
that word.... The author has managed with sovereign freedom; has transposed occurrences
and has put them in a light that is foreign to them; has of his own accord composed
the discourses, and has illustrated lofty thoughts by inventing situations for
them. Difficult as it is to recognize, an actual tradition in his work is not wholly lacking.
For the history of Jesus, however, it can hardly anywhere be taken into account;
only little can be taken from it, and that with caution.... On the other hand it is a
source of the first rank for the answer of the question what living views of the person of
Jesus, what light and what warmth, the gospel has brought into being.</q> See Harnack's
article in Zeitschrift für Theol. u. Kirche, 2:189-231, and his Wesen des Christenthums,
13. Kaftan also, who belongs to the same Ritschlian school with Harnack, tells us in
his Truth of the Christian Religion, 1:97, that as the result of the Logos-speculation,
<q>the centre of gravity, instead of being placed in the historical Christ who founded
the kingdom of God, is placed in the Christ who as eternal Logos of God was the
mediator in the creation of the world.</q> This view is elaborated by Hatch in his Hibbert
Lectures for 1888, on the Influence of Greek Ideas and Usages upon the Christian
Church.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We object to the Development-theory of Harnack, that
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The Sermon on the Mount is not the sum of the gospel, nor its
original form. Mark is the most original of the gospels, yet Mark omits
the Sermon on the Mount, and Mark is preëminently the gospel of the
miracle-worker.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) All four gospels lay the emphasis, not on Jesus' life and ethical
teaching, but on his death and resurrection. Matthew implies Christ's
deity when it asserts his absolute knowledge of the Father (11:27), his
universal judgeship (25:32), his supreme authority (28:18), and his
omnipresence (28:20), while the phrase <q>Son of man</q> implies that he is
also <q>Son of God.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Mat. 11:27&mdash;<q>All things have been delivered unto me of my Father: and no one knoweth the Son, save the Father;
neither doth any know the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son willeth to reveal him</q></emph>; <emph>25:32&mdash;<q>and
before him shall be gathered all the nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as the shepherd separateth the
sheep from the goats</q></emph>; <emph>28:18&mdash;<q>All authority hath been given unto me in heaven and on earth</q></emph>; <emph>28:20&mdash;<q>lo, I
am with you always, even unto the end of the world.</q></emph> These sayings of Jesus in Matthew's gospel
show that the conception of Christ's greatness was not peculiar to John: <emph><q>I am</q></emph> transcends
time; <emph><q>with you</q></emph> transcends space. Jesus speaks <q>sub specie eternitatis</q>; his
utterance is equivalent to that of <emph>John 8:58&mdash;<q>Before Abraham was born, I am,</q></emph> and to that of
<emph>Hebrews 13:8&mdash;<q>Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and to-day, yea and for ever.</q></emph> He is, as Paul declares in
<emph>Eph. 1:23</emph>, one <emph><q>that filleth all in all,</q></emph> that is, who is omnipresent.
</p>

<p>
A. H. Strong, Philos. and Religion, 206&mdash;The phrase <q>Son of man</q> intimates that
Christ was more than man: <q>Suppose I were to go about proclaiming myself <q>Son of
man.</q> Who does not see that it would be mere impertinence, unless I claimed to be
something more. <q>Son of Man? But what of that? Cannot every human being call
himself the same?</q> When one takes the title <q>Son of man</q> for his characteristic designation,
as Jesus did, he implies that there is something strange in his being Son of man;
that this is not his original condition and dignity; that it is condescension on his part
to be Son of man. In short, when Christ calls himself Son of man, it implies that he
has come from a higher level of being to inhabit this low earth of ours. And so, when
we are asked <q>What think ye of the Christ? whose son is he?</q> we must answer, not
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
simply, He is Son of man, but also, He is Son of God.</q> On Son of man, see Driver; on
Son of God, see Sanday; both in Hastings' Dictionary of the Bible. Sanday: <q>The
Son is so called primarily as incarnate. But that which is the essence of the Incarnation
must needs be also larger than the Incarnation. It must needs have its roots in
the eternity of Godhead.</q> Gore, Incarnation, 65, 73&mdash;<q>Christ, the final Judge, of the
synoptics, is not dissociable from the divine, eternal Being, of the fourth gospel.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The preëxistence and atonement of Christ cannot be regarded as
accretions upon the original gospel, since these find expression in Paul
who wrote before any of our evangelists, and in his epistles anticipated the
Logos-doctrine of John.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) We may grant that Greek influence, through the Alexandrian philosophy,
helped the New Testament writers to discern what was already
present in the life and work and teaching of Jesus; but, like the microscope
which discovers but does not create, it added nothing to the substance of
the faith.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Gore, Incarnation, 62&mdash;<q>The divinity, incarnation, resurrection of Christ were not
an accretion upon the original belief of the apostles and their first disciples, for these
are all recognized as uncontroverted matters of faith in the four great epistles of Paul,
written at a date when the greater part of those who had seen the risen Christ were
still alive.</q> The Alexandrian philosophy was not the source of apostolic doctrine, but
only the form in which that doctrine was cast, the light thrown upon it which brought
out its meaning. A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 146&mdash;<q>When we come to John's
gospel, therefore, we find in it the mere unfolding of truth that for substance had
been in the world for at least sixty years.... If the Platonizing philosophy of Alexandria
assisted in this genuine development of Christian doctrine, then the Alexandrian
philosophy was a providential help to inspiration. The microscope does not invent; it
only discovers. Paul and John did not add to the truth of Christ; their philosophical
equipment was only a microscope which brought into clear view the truth that was
there already.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 1:126&mdash;<q>The metaphysical conception of the Logos, as
immanent in the world and ordering it according to law, was filled with religious and
moral contents. In Jesus the cosmical principle of nature became a religious principle
of salvation.</q> See Kilpatrick's article on Philosophy, in Hastings' Bible Dictionary.
Kilpatrick holds that Harnack ignores the self-consciousness of Jesus; does not fairly
interpret the Acts in its mention of the early worship of Jesus by the church before
Greek philosophy had influenced it; refers to the intellectual peculiarities of the N. T.
writers conceptions which Paul insists are simply the faith of all Christian people as
such; forgets that the Christian idea of union with God secured through the atoning
and reconciling work of a personal Redeemer utterly transcended Greek thought, and
furnished the solution of the problem after which Greek philosophy was vainly groping.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) Though Mark says nothing of the virgin-birth because his story is
limited to what the apostles had witnessed of Jesus' deeds, Matthew apparently
gives us Joseph's story and Luke gives Mary's story&mdash;both stories
naturally published only after Jesus' resurrection.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) The larger understanding of doctrine after Jesus' death was itself
predicted by our Lord (John 16:12). The Holy Spirit was to bring his
teachings to remembrance, and to guide into all the truth (16:13), and
the apostles were to continue the work of teaching which he had begun
(Acts 1:1).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>John 16:12, 13&mdash;<q>I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit, when he, the
Spirit of truth, is come, he shall guide you into all the truth</q></emph>; <emph>Acts 1:1&mdash;<q>The former treatise I made, O Theophilus,
concerning all that Jesus began to do and to teach.</q></emph> A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 146&mdash;<q>That
the beloved disciple, after a half century of meditation upon what he had seen and
heard of God manifest in the flesh, should have penetrated more deeply into the meaning
of that wonderful revelation is not only not surprising,&mdash;it is precisely what Jesus
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
himself foretold. Our Lord had many things to say to his disciples, but then they
could not bear them. He promised that the Holy Spirit should bring to their remembrance
both himself and his words, and should lead them into all the truth. And this
is the whole secret of what are called accretions to original Christianity. So far as
they are contained in Scripture, they are inspired discoveries and unfoldings, not mere
speculations and inventions. They are not additions, but elucidations, not vain
imaginings, but correct interpretations.... When the later theology, then, throws
out the supernatural and dogmatic, as coming not from Jesus but from Paul's epistles
and from the fourth gospel, our claim is that Paul and John are only inspired and
authoritative interpreters of Jesus, seeing themselves and making us see the fulness of
the Godhead that dwelt in him.</q>
</p>

<p>
While Harnack, in our judgment, errs in his view that Paul contributed to the gospel
elements which it did not originally possess, he shows us very clearly many of the
elements in that gospel which he was the first to recognize. In his Wesen des Christenthums,
111, he tells us that a few years ago a celebrated Protestant theologian declared
that Paul, with his Rabbinical theology, was the destroyer of the Christian religion.
Others have regarded him as the founder of that religion. But the majority have
seen in him the apostle who best understood his Lord and did most to continue his
work. Paul, as Harnack maintains, first comprehended the gospel definitely: (1) as
an accomplished redemption and a present salvation&mdash;the crucified and risen Christ
as giving access to God and righteousness and peace therewith; (2) as something new,
which does away with the religion of the law; (3) as meant for all, and therefore for
Gentiles also, indeed, as superseding Judaism; (4) as expressed in terms which are not
simply Greek but also human,&mdash;Paul made the gospel comprehensible to the world.
Islam, rising in Arabia, is an Arabian religion still. Buddhism remains an Indian
religion. Christianity is at home in all lands. Paul put new life into the Roman
empire, and inaugurated the Christian culture of the West. He turned a local into a
universal religion. His influence however, according to Harnack, tended to the undue
exaltation of organization and dogma and O. T. inspiration&mdash;points in which, in our
judgment, Paul took sober middle ground and saved Christian truth for the world.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Genuineness of the Books of the Old Testament.</head>

<p>
Since nearly one half of the Old Testament is of anonymous authorship
and certain of its books may be attributed to definite historic characters
only by way of convenient classification or of literary personification, we
here mean by genuineness honesty of purpose and freedom from anything
counterfeit or intentionally deceptive so far as respects the age or
the authorship of the documents.
</p>

<p>
We show the genuineness of the Old Testament books:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) From the witness of the New Testament, in which all but six books
of the Old Testament are either quoted or alluded to as genuine.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The N. T. shows coincidences of language with the O. T. Apocryphal books, but it
contains only one direct quotation from them; while, with the exception of Judges,
Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Esther, Ezra, and Nehemiah, every book in the Hebrew canon
is used either for illustration or proof. The single Apocryphal quotation is found in <emph>Jude 14</emph>
and is in all probability taken from the book of Enoch. Although Volkmar puts the
date of this book at 132 A. D., and although some critics hold that Jude quoted only
the same primitive tradition of which the author of the book of Enoch afterwards
made use, the weight of modern scholarship inclines to the opinion that the book
itself was written as early as 170-70 B. C., and that Jude quoted from it; see Hastings'
Bible Dictionary: Book of Enoch; Sanday, Bampton Lect. on Inspiration, 95. <q>If
Paul could quote from Gentile poets (<emph>Acts 17:28</emph>; <emph>Titus 1:12</emph>), it is hard to understand why
Jude could not cite a work which was certainly in high standing among the faithful</q>;
see Schodde, Book of Enoch, 41, with the Introd. by Ezra Abbot. While <emph>Jude 14</emph> gives
us the only direct and express quotation from an Apocryphal book, <emph>Jude 6</emph> and <emph>9</emph> contain
allusions to the Book of Enoch and to the Assumption of Moses; see Charles,
Assumption of Moses, 62. In <emph>Hebrews 1:3</emph>, we have words taken from Wisdom 7:26;
and <emph>Hebrews 11:34-38</emph> is a reminiscence of 1 Maccabees.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) From the testimony of Jewish authorities, ancient and modern,
who declare the same books to be sacred, and only the same books, that
are now comprised in our Old Testament Scriptures.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Josephus enumerates twenty-two of these books <q>which are justly accredited</q> (omit
θεῖα&mdash;Niese, and Hastings' Dict., 3:607). Our present Hebrew Bible makes twenty-four,
by separating Ruth from Judges, and Lamentations from Jeremiah. See Josephus,
Against Apion, 1:8; Smith's Bible Dictionary, article on the Canon, 1:359, 360. Philo
(born 20 B. C.) never quotes an Apocryphal book, although he does quote from nearly
all the books of the O. T.; see Ryle, Philo and Holy Scripture. George Adam Smith,
Modern Criticism and Preaching, 7&mdash;<q>The theory which ascribed the Canon of the O.
T. to a single decision of the Jewish church in the days of its inspiration is not a theory
supported by facts. The growth of the O. T. Canon was very gradual. Virtually it
began in 621 B. C., with the acceptance by all Judah of Deuteronomy, and the adoption
of the whole Law, or first five books of the O. T., under Nehemiah in 445 B. C.
Then came the prophets before 200 B. C., and the Hagiographa from a century to two
centuries later. The strict definition of the last division was not complete by the time
of Christ. Christ seems to testify to the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms; yet
neither Christ nor his apostles make any quotation from Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther,
Canticles, or Ecclesiastes, the last of which books were not yet recognized by all the
Jewish schools. But while Christ is the chief authority for the O. T., he was also its
first critic. He rejected some parts of the Law and was indifferent to many others.
He enlarged the sixth and seventh commandments, and reversed the eye for an eye,
and the permission of divorce; touched the leper, and reckoned all foods lawful;
broke away from literal observance of the Sabbath-day; left no commands about
sacrifice, temple-worship, circumcision, but, by institution of the New Covenant, abrogated
these sacraments of the Old. The apostles appealed to extra-canonical writings.</q>
Gladden, Seven Puzzling Bible Books, 68-96&mdash;<q>Doubts were entertained in our Lord's
day as to the canonicity of several parts of the O. T., especially Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
Song of Solomon, Esther.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) From the testimony of the Septuagint translation, dating from the
first half of the third century, or from 280 to 180 B. C.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
MSS. of the Septuagint contain, indeed, the O. T. Apocrypha, but the writers of the
latter do not recognize their own work as on a level with the canonical Scriptures,
which they regard as distinct from all other books (Ecclesiasticus, prologue, and
48:24; also 24:23-27; 1 Mac. 12:9; 2 Mac. 6:23; 1 Esd. 1:28; 6:1; Baruch 2:21). So
both ancient and modern Jews. See Bissell, in Lange's Commentary on the Apocrypha,
Introduction, 44. In the prologue to the apocryphal book of Ecclesiasticus, we read
of <q>the Law and the Prophets and the rest of the books,</q> which shows that as early
as 130 B. C., the probable date of Ecclesiasticus, a threefold division of the Jewish
sacred books was recognized. That the author, however, did not conceive of these
books as constituting a completed canon seems evident from his assertion in this connection
that his grandfather Jesus also wrote. 1 Mac. 12:9 (80-90 B. C.) speaks of <q>the
sacred books which are now in our hands.</q> Hastings, Bible Dictionary, 3:611&mdash;<q>The
O. T. was the result of a gradual process which began with the sanction of the Hexateuch
by Ezra and Nehemiah, and practically closed with the decisions of the Council of
Jamnia</q>&mdash;Jamnia is the ancient Jabneh, 7 miles south by west of Tiberias, where met
a council of rabbins at some time between 90 to 118 A. D. This Council decided in
favor of Canticles and Ecclesiastes, and closed the O. T. Canon.
</p>

<p>
The Greek version of the Pentateuch which forms a part of the Septuagint is said by
Josephus to have been made in the reign and by the order of Ptolemy Philadelphus,
King of Egypt, about 270 or 280 B. C. <q>The legend is that it was made by seventy-two
persons in seventy-two days. It is supposed, however, by modern critics that this
version of the several books is the work not only of different hands but of separate
times. It is probable that at first only the Pentateuch was translated, and the remaining
books gradually; but the translation is believed to have been completed by the
second century B. C.</q> (Century Dictionary, <hi rend='italic'>in voce</hi>). It therefore furnishes an important
witness to the genuineness of our O. T. documents. Driver, Introd. to O. T. Lit.,
xxxi&mdash;<q>For the opinion, often met with in modern books, that the Canon of the O. T.
was closed by Ezra, or in Ezra's time, there is no foundation in antiquity whatever....
All that can reasonably be treated as historical in the accounts of Ezra's
literary labors is limited to the Law.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) From indications that soon after the exile, and so early as the
times of Ezra and Nehemiah (500-450 B. C.), the Pentateuch together with
the book of Joshua was not only in existence but was regarded as authoritative.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
2 Mac, 2:13-15 intimates that Nehemiah founded a library, and there is a tradition
that a <q>Great Synagogue</q> was gathered in his time to determine the Canon. But
Hastings' Dictionary, 4:644, asserts that <q>the Great Synagogue was originally a meeting,
and not an institution. It met once for all, and all that is told about it, except
what we read in Nehemiah, is pure fable of the later Jews.</q> In like manner no dependence
is to be placed upon the tradition that Ezra miraculously restored the ancient
Scriptures that had been lost during the exile. Clement of Alexandria says: <q>Since
the Scriptures perished in the Captivity of Nebuchadnezzar, Esdras (the Greek form of
Ezra) the Levite, the priest, in the time of Artaxerxes, King of the Persians, having
become inspired in the exercise of prophecy, restored again the whole of the ancient
Scriptures.</q> But the work now divided into 1 and 2 Chronicles, Ezra and Nehemiah,
mentions Darius Codomannus (<emph>Neh. 12:22</emph>), whose date is 336 B. C. The utmost the tradition
proves is that about 300 B. C. the Pentateuch was in some sense attributed to Moses;
see Bacon, Genesis of Genesis, 35; Bib. Sac., 1863:381, 660, 799; Smith, Bible Dict., art.:
Pentateuch; Theological Eclectic, 6:215; Bissell, Hist. Origin of the Bible, 398-403.
On the Men of the Great Synagogue, see Wright, Ecclesiastes, 5-12, 475-477.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) From the testimony of the Samaritan Pentateuch, dating from the
time of Ezra and Nehemiah (500-450 B. C.).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Samaritans had been brought by the king of Assyria from <emph><q>Babylon, and from Cuthah
and from Avva, and from Hamath and Sepharvaim</q> (2 K. 17:6, 24, 26)</emph>, to take the place of the people of
Israel whom the king had carried away captive to his own land. The colonists had
brought their heathen gods with them, and the incursions of wild beasts which the
intermission of tillage occasioned gave rise to the belief that the God of Israel was against
them. One of the captive Jewish priests was therefore sent to teach them <emph><q>the law of the
god of the land</q></emph> and he <emph><q>taught them how they should fear Jehovah</q> (2 K. 17:27, 28)</emph>. The result was
that they adopted the Jewish ritual, but combined the worship of Jehovah with that of
their graven images (<emph>verse 33</emph>). When the Jews returned from Babylon and began to
rebuild the walls of Jerusalem, the Samaritans offered their aid, but this aid was indignantly
refused (<emph>Ezra 4</emph> and <emph>Nehemiah 4</emph>). Hostility arose between Jews and Samaritans&mdash;a
hostility which continued not only to the time of Christ (<emph>John 4:9</emph>), but even to the
present day. Since the Samaritan Pentateuch substantially coincides with the Hebrew
Pentateuch, it furnishes us with a definite past date at which it certainly existed in
nearly its present form. It witnesses to the existence of our Pentateuch in essentially
its present form as far back as the time of Ezra and Nehemiah.
</p>

<p>
Green, Higher Criticism of the Pentateuch, 44, 45&mdash;<q>After being repulsed by the Jews,
the Samaritans, to substantiate their claim of being sprung from ancient Israel, eagerly
accepted the Pentateuch which was brought them by a renegade priest.</q> W. Robertson
Smith, in Encyc. Brit., 21:244&mdash;<q>The priestly law, which is throughout based on the
practice of the priests of Jerusalem before the captivity, was reduced to form after the
exile, and was first published by Ezra as the law of the rebuilt temple of Zion. The
Samaritans must therefore have derived their Pentateuch from the Jews after Ezra's
reforms, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, after 444 B. C. Before that time Samaritanism cannot have existed in
a form at all similar to that which we know; but there must have been a community
ready to accept the Pentateuch.</q> See Smith's Bible Dictionary, art.: Samaritan Pentateuch;
Hastings, Bible Dictionary, art.: Samaria; Stanley Leathes, Structure of the
O. T., 1-41.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) From the finding of <q>the book of the law</q> in the temple, in the
eighteenth year of King Josiah, or in 621 B. C.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>2 K. 22:8&mdash;<q>And Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the law
in the house of Jehovah.</q></emph> <emph>23:2&mdash;<q>The book of the covenant</q></emph> was read before the people by the
king and proclaimed to be the law of the land. Curtis, in Hastings' Bible Dict., 3:596&mdash;<q>The
earliest written law or book of divine instruction of whose introduction
or enactment an authentic account is given, was Deuteronomy or its main portion,
represented as found in the temple in the 18th year of king Josiah (B. C. 621) and
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
proclaimed by the king as the law of the land. From that time forward Israel had
a written law which the pious believer was commanded to ponder day and night (<emph>Joshua
1:8</emph>; <emph>Ps. 1:2</emph>); and thus the Torah, as sacred literature, formally commenced in Israel.
This law aimed at a right application of Mosaic principles.</q> Ryle, in Hastings' Bible
Dict., 1:602&mdash;<q>The law of Deuteronomy represents an expansion and development of
the ancient code contained in <emph>Exodus 20-23</emph>, and precedes the final formulation of the
priestly ritual, which only received its ultimate form in the last period of revising the
structure of the Pentateuch.</q>
</p>

<p>
Andrew Harper, on Deuteronomy, in Expositor's Bible: <q>Deuteronomy does not
claim to have been written by Moses. He is spoken of in the third person in the introduction
and historical framework, while the speeches of Moses are in the first person.
In portions where the author speaks for himself, the phrase 'beyond Jordan' means
east of Jordan; in the speeches of Moses the phrase <q>beyond Jordan</q> means west of
Jordan; and the only exception is <emph>Deut. 3:8</emph>, which cannot originally have been part of
the speech of Moses. But the style of both parts is the same, and if the 3rd person parts
are by a later author, the 1st person parts are by a later author also. Both differ from
other speeches of Moses in the Pentateuch. Can the author be a contemporary writer
who gives Moses' words, as John gave the words of Jesus? No, for Deuteronomy covers
only the book of the Covenant, Exodus 20-23. It uses JE but not P, with which JE is
interwoven. But JE appears in Joshua and contributes to it an account of Joshua's
death. JE speaks of kings in Israel (<emph>Gen. 36:31-39</emph>). Deuteronomy plainly belongs to
the early centuries of the Kingdom, or to the middle of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Bacon, Genesis of Genesis, 43-49&mdash;<q>The Deuteronomic law was so short that Shaphan
could read it aloud before the king (<emph>2 K. 22:10</emph>) and the king could read <emph><q>the whole of it</q></emph>
before the people (<emph>23:2</emph>); compare the reading of the Pentateuch for a whole week
(<emph>Neh. 8:2-18</emph>). It was in the form of a covenant; it was distinguished by curses; it
was an expansion and modification, fully within the legitimate province of the prophet,
of a Torah of Moses codified from the traditional form of at least a century before.
Such a Torah existed, was attributed to Moses, and is now incorporated as <emph><q>the book
of the covenant</q></emph> in <emph>Exodus 20</emph> to <emph>24</emph>. The year 620 is therefore the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>terminus a quo</foreign> of Deuteronomy.
The date of the priestly code is 444 B. C.</q> Sanday, Bampton Lectures for
1893, grants <q>(1) the presence in the Pentateuch of a considerable element which in its
present shape is held by many to be not earlier than the captivity; (2) the composition
of the book of Deuteronomy, not long, or at least not very long, before its promulgation
by king Josiah in the year 621, which thus becomes a pivot-date in the history
of Hebrew literature.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) From references in the prophets Hosea (B. C. 743-737) and Amos
(759-745) to a course of divine teaching and revelation extending far back
of their day.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Hosea 8:12&mdash;<q>I wrote for him the ten thousand things of my law</q></emph>; here is asserted the existence
prior to the time of the prophet, not only of a law, but of a written law. All critics admit
the book of Hosea to be a genuine production of the prophet, dating from the eighth
century B. C.; see Green, in Presb. Rev., 1886:585-608. <emph>Amos 2:4&mdash;<q>they have rejected the law
of Jehovah, and have not kept his statutes</q></emph>; here is proof that, more than a century before the
finding of Deuteronomy in the temple, Israel was acquainted with God's law. Fisher,
Nature and Method of Revelation, 26, 27&mdash;<q>The lofty plane reached by the prophets
was not reached at a single bound.... There must have been a tap-root extending
far down into the earth.</q> Kurtz remarks that <q>the later books of the O. T. would be
a tree without roots, if the composition of the Pentateuch were transferred to a later
period of Hebrew history.</q> If we substitute for the word <q>Pentateuch</q> the words
<emph><q>Book of the covenant,</q></emph> we may assent to this dictum of Kurtz. There is sufficient evidence
that, before the times of Hosea and Amos, Israel possessed a written law&mdash;the law
embraced in <emph>Exodus 20-24</emph>&mdash;but the Pentateuch as we now have it, including Leviticus,
seems to date no further back than the time of Jeremiah, 445 B. C. The Levitical law
however was only the codification of statutes and customs whose origin lay far back
in the past and which were believed to be only the natural expansion of the principles
of Mosaic legislation.
</p>

<p>
Leathes, Structure of O. T., 54&mdash;<q>Zeal for the restoration of the temple after the
exile implied that it had long before been the centre of the national polity, that there
had been a ritual and a law before the exile.</q> Present Day Tracts, 3:52&mdash;Levitical
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
institutions could not have been first established by David. It is inconceivable that he
<q>could have taken a whole tribe, and no trace remain of so revolutionary a measure as
the dispossessing them of their property to make them ministers of religion.</q> James
Robertson, Early History of Israel: <q>The varied literature of 850-750 B. C. implies the
existence of reading and writing for some time before. Amos and Hosea hold, for the
period succeeding Moses, the same scheme of history which modern critics pronounce
late and unhistorical. The eighth century B. C. was a time of broad historic day, when
Israel had a definite account to give of itself and of its history. The critics appeal to the
prophets, but they reject the prophets when these tell us that other teachers taught
the same truth before them, and when they declare that their nation had been taught
a better religion and had declined from it, in other words, that there had been law
long before their day. The kings did not <emph>give law</emph>. The priests <emph>presupposed</emph> it.
There must have been a formal system of law much earlier than the critics admit, and
also an earlier reference in their worship to the great events which made them a separate
people.</q> And Dillman goes yet further back and declares that the entire work of
Moses presupposes <q>a preparatory stage of higher religion in Abraham.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>h</hi>) From the repeated assertions of Scripture that Moses himself wrote
a law for his people, confirmed as these are by evidence of literary and
legislative activity in other nations far antedating his time.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Ex. 24:4&mdash;<q>And Moses wrote all the words of Jehovah</q></emph>; <emph>34:27&mdash;<q>And Jehovah said unto Moses, Write thou
these words: for after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel</q></emph>; <emph>Num. 33:2&mdash;<q>And
Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by the commandment of Jehovah</q></emph>; <emph>Deut. 31:9&mdash;<q>And
Moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the sons of Levi, that bare the ark of the covenant of
Jehovah, and unto all the elders of Israel</q></emph>; <emph>22&mdash;<q>So Moses wrote this song the same day, and taught it the children
of Israel</q></emph>; <emph>24-26&mdash;<q>And it came to pass, when Moses had made an end of writing the words of this law in a book,
until they were finished, that Moses commanded the Levites, that bare the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, saying, Take
this book of the law, and put it by the side of the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God, that it may be there for
a witness against thee.</q></emph> The law here mentioned may possibly be only <emph><q>the book of the covenant</q>
(Ex. 20-24)</emph>, and the speeches of Moses in Deuteronomy may have been orally handed
down. But the fact that Moses was <emph><q>instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians</q> (Acts 7:22)</emph>,
together with the fact that the art of writing was known in Egypt for many hundred
years before his time, make it more probable that a larger portion of the Pentateuch
was of his own composition.
</p>

<p>
Kenyon, in Hastings' Dict., art.: Writing, dates the Proverbs of Ptah-hotep, the first
recorded literary composition in Egypt, at 3580-3536 B. C., and asserts the free use of
writing among the Sumerian inhabitants of Babylonia as early as 4000 B. C. The statutes
of Hammurabi king of Babylon compare for extent with those of Leviticus, yet they
date back to the time of Abraham, 2200 B. C.,&mdash;indeed Hammurabi is now regarded by
many as the Amraphel of <emph>Gen. 14:1</emph>. Yet these statutes antedate Moses by 700 years. It
is interesting to observe that Hammurabi professes to have received his statutes
directly from the Sun-god of Sippar, his capital city. See translation by Winckler, in
Der alte Orient, 97; Johns, The Oldest Code of Laws; Kelso, in Princeton Theol. Rev.,
July, 1905:399-412&mdash;Facts <q>authenticate the traditional date of the Book of the Covenant,
overthrow the formula Prophets and Law, restore the old order Law and
Prophets, and put into historical perspective the tradition that Moses was the author
of the Sinaitic legislation.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
As the controversy with regard to the genuineness of the Old Testament
books has turned of late upon the claims of the Higher Criticism in
general, and upon the claims of the Pentateuch in particular, we subjoin
separate notes upon these subjects.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Higher Criticism in general.</hi> Higher Criticism does not mean criticism in any
invidious sense, any more than Kant's Critique of Pure Reason was an unfavorable or
destructive examination. It is merely a dispassionate investigation of the authorship,
date and purpose of Scripture books, in the light of their composition, style and
internal characteristics. As the Lower Criticism is a text-critique, the Higher Criticism
is a structure-critique. A bright Frenchman described a literary critic as one
who rips open the doll to get at the sawdust there is in it. This can be done with a
sceptical and hostile spirit, and there can be little doubt that some of the higher critics
of the Old Testament have begun their studies with prepossessions against the supernatural,
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
which have vitiated all their conclusions. These presuppositions are often
unconscious, but none the less influential. When Bishop Colenso examined the Pentateuch
and Joshua, he disclaimed any intention of assailing the miraculous narratives
as such; as if he had said: <q>My dear little fish, you need not fear me; I do not wish to
catch you; I only intend to drain the pond in which you live.</q> To many scholars the
waters at present seem very low in the Hexateuch and indeed throughout the whole
Old Testament.
</p>

<p>
Shakespeare made over and incorporated many old Chronicles of Plutarch and Holinshed,
and many Italian tales and early tragedies of other writers; but Pericles and
Titus Andronicus still pass current under the name of Shakespeare. We speak even
now of <q>Gesenius' Hebrew Grammar,</q> although of its twenty-seven editions the last
fourteen have been published since his death, and more of it has been written by other
editors than Gesenius ever wrote himself. We speak of <q>Webster's Dictionary,</q>
though there are in the <q>Unabridged</q> thousands of words and definitions that Webster
never saw. Francis Brown: <q>A modern writer masters older records and writes
a wholly new book. Not so with eastern historians. The latest comer, as Renan says,
<q>absorbs his predecessors without assimilating them, so that the most recent has in its
belly the fragments of the previous works in a raw state.</q> The Diatessaron of Tatian
is a parallel to the composite structure of the O. T. books. One passage yields the following:
<emph>Mat. 21:12a</emph>; <emph>John 2:14a</emph>; <emph>Mat. 21:12b</emph>; <emph>John 2:14b, 15</emph>; <emph>Mat. 21:12c, 13</emph>; <emph>John 2:16</emph>; <emph>Mark 11:16</emph>;
<emph>John 2:17-22</emph>; all succeeding each other without a break.</q> Gore, Lux Mundi, 353&mdash;<q>There
is nothing materially untruthful, though there is something uncritical, in attributing
the whole legislation to Moses acting under the divine command. It would be only of
a piece with the attribution of the collection of Psalms to David, and of Proverbs to
Solomon.</q>
</p>

<p>
The opponents of the Higher Criticism have much to say in reply. Sayce, Early
History of the Hebrews, holds that the early chapters of Genesis were copied from
Babylonian sources, but he insists upon a Mosaic or pre-Mosaic date for the copying.
Hilprecht however declares that the monotheistic faith of Israel could never have proceeded
<q>from the Babylonian mountain of gods&mdash;that charnel-house full of corruption
and dead men's bones.</q> Bissell, Genesis Printed in Colors, Introd., iv&mdash;<q>It is
improbable that so many documentary histories existed so early, or if existing that the
compiler should have attempted to combine them. Strange that the earlier should be
J and should use the word <q>Jehovah,</q> while the later P should use the word <q>Elohim,</q>
when <q>Jehovah</q> would have far better suited the Priests' Code.... xiii&mdash;The
Babylonian tablets contain in a continuous narrative the more prominent facts of both
the alleged Elohistic and Jehovistic sections of Genesis, and present them mainly in
the Biblical order. Several hundred years before Moses what the critics call <emph>two</emph> were
already <emph>one</emph>. It is absurd to say that the unity was due to a redactor at the period of
the exile, 444 B. C. He who believes that God revealed himself to primitive man as one
God, will see in the Akkadian story a polytheistic corruption of the original monotheistic
account.</q> We must not estimate the antiquity of a pair of boots by the last patch
which the cobbler has added; nor must we estimate the antiquity of a Scripture book
by the glosses and explanations added by later editors. As the London Spectator
remarks on the Homeric problem: <q>It is as impossible that a first-rate poem or work
of art should be produced without a great master-mind which first conceives the whole,
as that a fine living bull should be developed out of beef-sausages.</q> As we shall proceed
to show, however, these utterances overestimate the unity of the Pentateuch and
ignore some striking evidences of its gradual growth and composite structure.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Authorship of the Pentateuch in particular.</hi> Recent critics, especially Kuenen
and Robertson Smith, have maintained that the Pentateuch is Mosaic only in the sense
of being a gradually growing body of traditional law, which was codified as late as the
time of Ezekiel, and, as the development of the spirit and teachings of the great law-giver,
was called by a legal fiction after the name of Moses and was attributed to him.
The actual order of composition is therefore: (1) Book of the Covenant (<emph>Exodus 20-23</emph>);
(2) Deuteronomy; (3) Leviticus. Among the reasons assigned for this view are the
facts (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) that Deuteronomy ends with an account of Moses' death, and therefore could
not have been written by Moses; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) that in Leviticus Levites are mere servants to the
priests, while in Deuteronomy the priests are officiating Levites, or, in other words, all
the Levites are priests; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) that the books of Judges and of 1 Samuel, with their record
of sacrifices offered in many places, give no evidence that either Samuel or the nation
of Israel had any knowledge of a law confining worship to a local sanctuary. See
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
Kuenen, Prophets and Prophecy in Israel; Wellhausen, Geschichte Israels, Band 1; and
art.: Israel, in Encyc. Brit., 13:398, 399, 415; W. Robertson Smith, O. T. in Jewish Church,
306, 386, and Prophets of Israel; Hastings, Bible Dict., arts.: Deuteronomy, Hexateuch,
and Canon of the O. T.
</p>

<p>
It has been urged in reply, (1) that Moses may have written, not autographically,
but through a scribe (perhaps Joshua), and that this scribe may have completed the
history in Deuteronomy with the account of Moses' death; (2) that Ezra or subsequent
prophets may have subjected the whole Pentateuch to recension, and may have
added explanatory notes; (3) that documents of previous ages may have been incorporated,
in course of its composition by Moses, or subsequently by his successors;
(4) that the apparent lack of distinction between the different classes of Levites in
Deuteronomy may be explained by the fact that, while Leviticus was written with
exact detail for the priests, Deuteronomy is the record of a brief general and oral summary
of the law, addressed to the people at large and therefore naturally mentioning
the clergy as a whole; (5) that the silence of the book of Judges as to the Mosaic
ritual may be explained by the design of the book to describe only general history, and
by the probability that at the tabernacle a ritual was observed of which the people in
general were ignorant. Sacrifices in other places only accompanied special divine
manifestations which made the recipient temporarily a priest. Even if it were proved
that the law with regard to a central sanctuary was not observed, it would not show
that the law did not exist, any more than violation of the second commandment by
Solomon proves his ignorance of the decalogue, or the mediæval neglect of the N. T.
by the Roman church proves that the N. T. did not then exist. We cannot argue that
<q>where there was transgression, there was no law</q> (Watts, New Apologetic, 83, and
The Newer Criticism).
</p>

<p>
In the light of recent research, however, we cannot regard these replies as satisfactory.
Woods, in his article on the Hexateuch, Hastings' Dictionary, 2:365, presents a
moderate statement of the results of the higher criticism which commends itself to us
as more trustworthy. He calls it a theory of stratification, and holds that <q rend='pre'>certain
more or less independent documents, dealing largely with the same series of events,
were composed at different periods, or, at any rate, under different auspices, and were
afterwards combined, so that our present Hexateuch, which means our Pentateuch
with the addition of Joshua, contains these several different literary strata.... The
main grounds for accepting this hypothesis of stratification are (1) that the various
literary pieces, with very few exceptions, will be found on examination to arrange
themselves by common characteristics into comparatively few groups; (2) that an
original consecution of narrative may be frequently traced between what in their
present form are isolated fragments.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>This will be better understood by the following illustration. Let us suppose a problem
of this kind: Given a patchwork quilt, explain the character of the original pieces
out of which the bits of stuff composing the quilt were cut. First, we notice that, however
well the colors may blend, however nice and complete the whole may look, many
of the adjoining pieces do not agree in material, texture, pattern, color, or the like.
Ergo, they have been made up out of very different pieces of stuff.... But suppose
we further discover that many of the bits, though now separated, are like one another
in material, texture, etc., we may conjecture that these have been cut out of one piece.
But we shall prove this beyond reasonable doubt if we find that several bits when
unpicked fit together, so that the pattern of one is continued in the other; and,
moreover, that if all of like character are sorted out, they form, say, four groups, each
of which was evidently once a single piece of stuff, though parts of each are found
missing, because, no doubt, they have not been required to make the whole. But we
make the analogy of the Hexateuch even closer, if we further suppose that in certain
parts of the quilt the bits belonging to, say, two of these groups are so combined as to
form a subsidiary pattern within the larger pattern of the whole quilt, and had evidently
been sewed together before being connected with other parts of the quilt; and
we may make it even closer still, if we suppose that, besides the more important bits
of stuff, smaller embellishments, borderings, and the like, had been added so as to
improve the general effect of the whole.</q>
</p>

<p>
The author of this article goes on to point out three main portions of the Hexateuch
which essentially differ from each other. There are three distinct codes: the
Covenant code (C&mdash;<emph>Ex. 20:22</emph> to <emph>23:33</emph>, and <emph>24:3-8</emph>), the Deuteronomic code (D), and the
Priestly code (P). These codes have peculiar relations to the narrative portions of the
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
Hexateuch. In Genesis, for example, <q>the greater part of the book is divided into
groups of longer or shorter pieces, generally paragraphs or chapters, distinguished
respectively by the almost exclusive use of Elohim or Jehovah as the name of God.</q>
Let us call these portions J and E. But we find such close affinities between C and
JE, that we may regard them as substantially one. <q rend='pre'>We shall find that the larger
part of the narratives, as distinct from the laws, of Exodus and Numbers belong to
JE; whereas, with special exceptions, the legal portions belong to P. In the last chapters
of Deuteronomy and in the whole of Joshua we find elements of JE. In the latter
book we also find elements which connect it with D.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It should be observed that not only do we find here and there <emph>separate pieces</emph> in the
Hexateuch, shown by their characters to belong to these three sources, JE, D, and
P, but the pieces will often be found connected together by an obvious continuity of
subject when pieced together, like the bits of patchwork in the illustration with which
we started. For example, if we read continuously <emph>Gen. 11:27-33</emph>; <emph>12:4b, 5</emph>; <emph>13:6a, 11b, 12a</emph>;
<emph>16:1a, 3, 15, 16</emph>; <emph>17</emph>; <emph>19:29</emph>; <emph>21:1a, 2b-5</emph>; <emph>23</emph>; <emph>25:7-11a</emph>&mdash;passages mainly, on other grounds,
attributed to P, we get an almost continuous and complete, though very concise,
account of Abraham's life.</q> We may concede the substantial correctness of the view
thus propounded. It simply shows God's actual method in making up the record of
his revelation. We may add that any scholar who grants that Moses did not himself
write the account of his own death and burial in the last chapter of Deuteronomy, or
who recognizes two differing accounts of creation in <emph>Genesis 1</emph> and <emph>2</emph>, has already begun
an analysis of the Pentateuch and has accepted the essential principles of the higher
criticism.
</p>

<p>
In addition to the literature already referred to mention may also be made of
Driver's Introd. to O. T., 118-150, and Deuteronomy, Introd.; W. R. Harper, in Hebraica,
Oct.-Dec. 1888, and W. H. Green's reply in Hebraica. Jan.-Apr. 1889; also Green,
The Unity of the Book of Genesis, Moses and the Prophets, Hebrew Feasts, and Higher
Criticism of the Pentateuch; with articles by Green in Presb. Rev., Jan. 1882 and Oct.
1886; Howard Osgood, in Essays on Pentateuchal Criticism, and in Bib. Sac., Oct. 1888,
and July, 1893; Watts, The Newer Criticism, and New Apologetic, 83; Presb. Rev., arts.
by H. P. Smith, April, 1882, and by F. L. Patton, 1883:341-410; Bib. Sac., April, 1882:291-344,
and by G. F. Wright, July, 1898:515-525; Brit. Quar., July, 1881:123; Jan. 1884:138-143;
Mead, Supernatural Revelation, 373-385; Stebbins, A Study in the Pentateuch;
Bissell, Historic Origin of the Bible, 277-342, and The Pentateuch, its Authorship and
Structure; Bartlett, Sources of History in the Pentateuch, 180-216, and The Veracity
of the Hexateuch; Murray, Origin and Growth of the Psalms, 58; Payne-Smith, in
Present Day Tracts, 3: no. 15; Edersheim, Prophecy and History; Kurtz, Hist. Old
Covenant, 1:46; Perowne, in Contemp. Rev., Jan. and Feb. 1888; Chambers, Moses and
his Recent Critics; Terry, Moses and the Prophets; Davis, Dictionary of the Bible, art.:
Pentateuch; Willis J. Beecher, The Prophets and the Promise; Orr, Problem of the
O. T., 326-329.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Credibility of the Writers of the Scriptures.</head>

<p>
We shall attempt to prove this only of the writers of the gospels; for if
they are credible witnesses, the credibility of the Old Testament, to which
they bore testimony, follows as a matter of course.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>They are capable or competent witnesses</hi>,&mdash;that is, they possessed
actual knowledge with regard to the facts they professed to relate. (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>)
They had opportunities of observation and inquiry. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) They were men
of sobriety and discernment, and could not have been themselves deceived.
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Their circumstances were such as to impress deeply upon their minds
the events of which they were witnesses.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>They are honest witnesses.</hi> This is evident when we consider that:
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Their testimony imperiled all their worldly interests. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The moral
elevation of their writings, and their manifest reverence for truth and constant
inculcation of it, show that they were not wilful deceivers, but good
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
men. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) There are minor indications of the honesty of these writers in
the circumstantiality of their story, in the absence of any expectation that
their narratives would be questioned, in their freedom from all disposition
to screen themselves or the apostles from censure.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Lessing says that Homer never calls Helen beautiful, but he gives the reader an
impression of her surpassing loveliness by portraying the effect produced by her presence.
So the evangelists do not describe Jesus' appearance or character, but lead us to
conceive the cause that could produce such effects. Gore, Incarnation, 77&mdash;<q>Pilate,
Caiaphas, Herod, Judas, are not abused,&mdash;they are photographed. The sin of a Judas
and a Peter is told with equal simplicity. Such fairness, wherever you find it, belongs
to a trustworthy witness.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>The writings of the evangelists mutually support each other.</hi> We
argue their credibility upon the ground of their number and of the consistency
of their testimony. While there is enough of discrepancy to
show that there has been no collusion between them, there is concurrence
enough to make the falsehood of them all infinitely improbable. Four
points under this head deserve mention: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The evangelists are independent
witnesses. This is sufficiently shown by the futility of the attempts to
prove that any one of them has abridged or transcribed another. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The
discrepancies between them are none of them irreconcilable with the
truth of the recorded facts, but only present those facts in new lights or
with additional detail. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That these witnesses were friends of Christ
does not lessen the value of their united testimony, since they followed
Christ only because they were convinced that these facts were true. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>)
While one witness to the facts of Christianity might establish its truth, the
combined evidence of four witnesses gives us a warrant for faith in the facts
of the gospel such as we possess for no other facts in ancient history whatsoever.
The same rule which would refuse belief in the events recorded
in the gospels <q>would throw doubt on any event in history.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
No man does or can write his own signature twice precisely alike. When two
signatures, therefore, purporting to be written by the same person, are precisely alike,
it is safe to conclude that one of them is a forgery. Compare the combined testimony
of the evangelists with the combined testimony of our five senses. <q>Let us assume,</q>
says Dr. C. E. Rider, <q>that the chances of deception are as one to ten when we use our
eyes alone, one to twenty when we use our ears alone, and one to forty when we use
our sense of touch alone; what are the chances of mistake when we use all these senses
simultaneously? The true result is obtained by multiplying these proportions together.
This gives one to eight thousand.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>The conformity of the gospel testimony with experience.</hi> We have
already shown that, granting the fact of sin and the need of an attested
revelation from God, miracles can furnish no presumption against the testimony
of those who record such a revelation, but, as essentially belonging
to such a revelation, miracles may be proved by the same kind and degree
of evidence as is required in proof of any other extraordinary facts. We
may assert, then, that in the New Testament histories there is no record
of facts contrary to experience, but only a record of facts not witnessed in
ordinary experience&mdash;of facts, therefore, in which we may believe, if the
evidence in other respects is sufficient.
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>Coincidence of this testimony with collateral facts and circumstances.</hi>
Under this head we may refer to (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) the numberless correspondences
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
between the narratives of the evangelists and contemporary history;
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the failure of every attempt thus far to show that the sacred history is
contradicted by any single fact derived from other trustworthy sources;
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the infinite improbability that this minute and complete harmony
should ever have been secured in fictitious narratives.
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='italic'>Conclusion from the argument for the credibility of the writers of
the gospels.</hi> These writers having been proved to be credible witnesses,
their narratives, including the accounts of the miracles and prophecies of
Christ and his apostles, must be accepted as true. But God would not
work miracles or reveal the future to attest the claims of false teachers.
Christ and his apostles must, therefore, have been what they claimed to be,
teachers sent from God, and their doctrine must be what they claimed it
to be, a revelation from God to men.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
On the whole subject, see Ebrard, Wissensch. Kritik der evang. Geschichte; Greenleaf,
Testimony of the Evangelists, 30, 31; Starkie on Evidence, 734; Whately, Historic
Doubts as to Napoleon Buonaparte; Haley, Examination of Alleged Discrepancies;
Smith's Voyage and Shipwreck of St. Paul; Paley, Horse Paulinæ; Birks, in Strivings
for the Faith, 37-72&mdash;<q>Discrepancies are like the slight diversities of the different pictures
of the stereoscope.</q> Renan calls the land of Palestine a fifth gospel. Weiss contrasts
the Apocryphal Gospels, where there is no historical setting and all is in the air,
with the evangelists, where time and place are always stated.
</p>

<p>
No modern apologist has stated the argument for the credibility of the New Testament
with greater clearness and force than Paley,&mdash;Evidences, chapters 8 and 10&mdash;<q rend='pre'>No
historical fact is more certain than that the original propagators of the gospel voluntarily
subjected themselves to lives of fatigue, danger, and suffering, in the prosecution
of their undertaking. The nature of the undertaking, the character of the persons
employed in it, the opposition of their tenets to the fixed expectations of the
country in which they at first advanced them, their undissembled condemnation of the
religion of all other countries, their total want of power, authority, or force, render it
in the highest degree <emph>probable</emph> that this must have been the case.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The probability is increased by what we know of the fate of the Founder of the
institution, who was put to death for his attempt, and by what we also know of the cruel
treatment of the converts to the institution within thirty years after its commencement&mdash;both
which points are attested by heathen writers, and, being once admitted,
leave it very incredible that the primitive emissaries of the religion who exercised their
ministry first amongst the people who had destroyed their Master, and afterwards
amongst those who persecuted their converts, should themselves escape with impunity
or pursue their purpose in ease and safety.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This probability, thus sustained by foreign testimony, is advanced, I think, to historical
certainty by the evidence of our own books, by the accounts of a writer who was
the companion of the persons whose sufferings he relates, by the letters of the persons
themselves, by predictions of persecutions, ascribed to the Founder of the religion,
which predictions would not have been inserted in this history, much less, studiously
dwelt upon, if they had not accorded with the event, and which, even if falsely
ascribed to him, could only have been so ascribed because the event suggested them;
lastly, by incessant exhortations to fortitude and patience, and by an earnestness, repetition
and urgency upon the subject which were unlikely to have appeared, if there
had not been, at the time, some extraordinary call for the exercise of such virtues. It
is also made out, I think, with sufficient evidence, that both the teachers and converts
of the religion, in consequence of their new profession, took up a new course of life
and conduct.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The next great question is, what they did this <emph>for</emph>. It was for a miraculous story of
some kind, since for the proof that Jesus of Nazareth ought to be received as the Messiah,
or as a messenger for God, they neither had nor could have anything but miracles
to stand upon.... If this be so, the religion must be true. These men could not be
deceivers. By only not bearing testimony, they might have avoided all these sufferings
and lived quietly. Would men in such circumstances pretend to have seen what
they never saw, assert facts which they had no knowledge of, go about lying to
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
teach virtue, and though not only convinced of Christ's being an impostor, but having
seen the success of his imposture in his crucifixion, yet persist in carrying it on, and so
persist as to bring upon themselves, for nothing, and with a full knowledge of the consequences,
enmity and hatred, danger and death?</q>
</p>

<p>
Those who maintain this, moreover, require us to believe that the Scripture writers
were <q>villains for no end but to teach honesty, and martyrs without the least prospect
of honor or advantage.</q> Imposture must have a motive. The self-devotion of the
apostles is the strongest evidence of their truth, for even Hume declares that <q>we cannot
make use of a more convincing argument in proof of honesty than to prove that
the actions ascribed to any persons are contrary to the course of nature, and that no
human motives, in such circumstances, could ever induce them to such conduct.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. The Supernatural Character of the Scripture Teaching.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Scripture teaching in general.</head>

<p>
A. The Bible is the work of one mind.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) In spite of its variety of authorship and the vast separation of its
writers from one another in point of time, there is a unity of subject, spirit,
and aim throughout the whole.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We here begin a new department of Christian evidences. We have thus far only
adduced external evidence. We now turn our attention to internal evidence. The relation
of external to internal evidence seems to be suggested in Christ's two questions in
<emph>Mark 8:27, 29&mdash;<q>Who do <emph>men</emph> say that I am?... who say <emph>ye</emph> that I am?</q></emph> The unity in variety displayed
in Scripture is one of the chief internal evidences. This unity is indicated in
our word <q>Bible,</q> in the singular number. Yet the original word was <q>Biblia,</q> a
plural number. The world has come to see a unity in what were once scattered fragments:
the many <q>Biblia</q> have become one <q>Bible.</q> In one sense R. W. Emerson's
contention is true: <q>The Bible is not a book,&mdash;it is a literature.</q> But we may also
say, and with equal truth: <q>The Bible is not simply a collection of books,&mdash;it is a book.</q>
The Bible is made up of sixty-six books, by forty writers, of all ranks,&mdash;shepherds,
fishermen, priests, warriors, statesmen, kings,&mdash;composing their works at intervals
through a period of seventeen centuries. Evidently no collusion between them is possible.
Scepticism tends ever to ascribe to the Scriptures greater variety of authorship
and date, but all this only increases the wonder of the Bible's unity. If unity in a half
dozen writers is remarkable, in forty it is astounding. <q>The many diverse instruments
of this orchestra play one perfect tune: hence we feel that they are led by one master
and composer.</q> Yet it takes the same Spirit who inspired the Bible to teach its unity.
The union is not an external or superficial one, but one that is internal and spiritual.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Not one moral or religious utterance of all these writers has been
contradicted or superseded by the utterances of those who have come later,
but all together constitute a consistent system.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Here we must distinguish between the external form and the moral and religious
substance. Jesus declares in <emph>Mat. 5:21, 22, 27, 28, 33, 34, 38, 39, 43, 44, <q>Ye have heard that it was said to
them of old time ... but I say unto you,</q></emph> and then he seems at first sight to abrogate certain
original commands. But he also declares in this connection, <emph>Mat. 5:17, 18&mdash;<q>Think not I am
come to destroy the law or the prophets: I came not to destroy but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven
and earth pass away, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass away from the law, till all things be accomplished.</q></emph>
Christ's new commandments only bring out the inner meaning of the old. He fulfils
them not in their literal form but in their essential spirit. So the New Testament completes
the revelation of the Old Testament and makes the Bible a perfect unity. In
this unity the Bible stands alone. Hindu, Persian, and Chinese religious books contain
no consistent system of faith. There is progress in revelation from the earlier to the
later books of the Bible, but this is not progress through successive steps of falsehood;
it is rather progress from a less to a more clear and full unfolding of the truth. The
whole truth lay germinally in the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>protevangelium</foreign> uttered to our first parents (<emph>Gen. 3:15</emph>&mdash;the
seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's head).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Each of these writings, whether early or late, has represented moral
and religious ideas greatly in advance of the age in which it has appeared,
and these ideas still lead the world.
</p>

<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
All our ideas of progress, with all the forward-looking spirit of modern Christendom,
are due to Scripture. The classic nations had no such ideas and no such spirit, except
as they caught them from the Hebrews. Virgil's prophecy, in his fourth Eclogue, of a
coming virgin and of the reign of Saturn and of the return of the golden age, was only
the echo of the Sibylline books and of the hope of a Redeemer with which the Jews
had leavened the whole Roman world; see A. H. Strong, The Great Poets and their
Theology, 94-96.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) It is impossible to account for this unity without supposing such a
supernatural suggestion and control that the Bible, while in its various
parts written by human agents, is yet equally the work of a superhuman
intelligence.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We may contrast with the harmony between the different Scripture writers the
contradictions and refutations which follow merely human philosophies&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, the
Hegelian idealism and the Spencerian materialism. Hegel is <q>a name to swear at, as
well as to swear by.</q> Dr. Stirling, in his Secret of Hegel, <q>kept all the secret to himself,
if he ever knew it.</q> A certain Frenchman once asked Hegel if he could not gather
up and express his philosophy in one sentence for him. <q>No,</q> Hegel replied, <q>at least
not in French.</q> If Talleyrand's maxim be true that whatever is not intelligible is not
French, Hegel's answer was a correct one. Hegel said of his disciples: <q>There is only
one man living who understands me, and he does not.</q>
</p>

<p>
Goeschel, Gabler, Daub, Marheinecke, Erdmann, are Hegel's right wing, or orthodox
representatives and followers in theology; see Sterrett, Hegel's Philosophy of Religion.
Hegel is followed by Alexander and Bradley in England, but is opposed by Seth
and Schiller. Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 279-300, gives a valuable estimate of his position
and influence: Hegel is all thought and no will. Prayer has no effect on God,&mdash;it
is a purely psychological phenomenon. There is no free-will, and man's sin as much
as man's holiness is a manifestation of the Eternal. Evolution is a fact, but it is only
fatalistic evolution. Hegel notwithstanding did great service by substituting knowledge
of reality for the oppressive Kantian relativity, and by banishing the old notion of
matter as a mysterious substance wholly unlike and incompatible with the properties
of mind. He did great service also by showing that the interactions of matter and
mind are explicable only by the presence of the Absolute Whole in every part, though
he erred greatly by carrying that idea of the unity of God and man beyond its proper
limits, and by denying that God has given to the will of man any power to put itself into
antagonism to His Will. Hegel did great service by showing that we cannot know even
the part without knowing the whole, but he erred in teaching, as T. H. Green did, that
the <emph>relations</emph> constitute the <emph>reality</emph> of the thing. He deprives both physical and psychical
existences of that degree of selfhood or independent reality which is essential to
both science and religion. We want real force, and not the mere idea of force; real
will, and not mere thought.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. This one mind that made the Bible is the same mind that made the
soul, for the Bible is divinely adapted to the soul,
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It shows complete acquaintance with the soul.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Bible addresses all parts of man's nature. There are Law and Epistles for man's
reason; Psalms and Gospels for his affections; Prophets and Revelations for his imagination.
Hence the popularity of the Scriptures. Their variety holds men. The Bible
has become interwoven into modern life. Law, literature, art, all show its moulding
influence.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It judges the soul&mdash;contradicting its passions, revealing its guilt,
and humbling its pride.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
No product of mere human nature could thus look down upon human nature and
condemn it. The Bible speaks to us from a higher level. The Samaritan woman's words
apply to the whole compass of divine revelation; it tells us all things that ever we did
(<emph>John 4:29</emph>). The Brahmin declared that <emph>Romans 1</emph>, with its description of heathen vices,
must have been forged after the missionaries came to India.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It meets the deepest needs of the soul&mdash;by solutions of its problems,
disclosures of God's character, presentations of the way of pardon, consolations
and promises for life and death.
</p>

<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Neither Socrates nor Seneca sets forth the nature, origin and consequences of sin as
committed against the holiness of God, nor do they point out the way of pardon and
renewal. The Bible teaches us what nature cannot, viz.: God's creatorship, the origin
of evil, the method of restoration, the certainty of a future state, and the principle of
rewards and punishments there.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Yet it is silent upon many questions for which writings of merely
human origin seek first to provide solutions.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Compare the account of Christ's infancy in the gospels with the fables of the Apocryphal
New Testament; compare the scant utterances of Scripture with regard to the
future state with Mohammed's and Swedenborg's revelations of Paradise. See Alexander
McLaren's sermon on The Silence of Scripture, in his book entitled: Christ in the
Heart, 131-141.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) There are infinite depths and inexhaustible reaches of meaning in
Scripture, which difference it from all other books, and which compel us to
believe that its author must be divine.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Sir Walter Scott, on his death bed: <q>Bring me the Book!</q> <q>What book?</q> said
Lockhart, his son-in-law. <q>There is but one book!</q> said the dying man. Réville concludes
an Essay in the Revue des deux Mondes (1864): <q>One day the question was
started, in an assembly, what book a man condemned to lifelong imprisonment, and to
whom but one book would be permitted, had better take into his cell with him. The
company consisted of Catholics, Protestants, philosophers and even materialists, but
all agreed that their choice would fall only on the Bible.</q>
</p>

<p>
On the whole subject, see Garbett, God's Word Written, 3-56; Luthardt, Saving
Truths, 210; Rogers, Superhuman Origin of Bible, 155-181; W. L. Alexander, Connection
and Harmony of O. T. and N. T.; Stanley Leathes, Structure of the O. T.; Bernard,
Progress of Doctrine in the N. T.; Rainy, Delivery and Development of Doctrine;
Titcomb, in Strivings for the Faith; Immer, Hermeneutics, 91; Present Day Tracts, 4:
no. 23; 5: no. 28; 6: no. 31; Lee on Inspiration, 26-32.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Moral System of the New Testament.</head>

<p>
The perfection of this system is generally conceded. All will admit that
it greatly surpasses any other system known among men. Among its distinguishing
characteristics may be mentioned:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Its comprehensiveness,&mdash;including all human duties in its code,
even the most generally misunderstood and neglected, while it permits no
vice whatsoever.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Buddhism regards family life as sinful. Suicide was commended by many ancient
philosophers. Among the Spartans to steal was praiseworthy,&mdash;only to be caught
stealing was criminal. Classic times despised humility. Thomas Paine said that Christianity
cultivated <q>the spirit of a spaniel,</q> and John Stuart Mill asserted that Christ
ignored duty to the state. Yet Peter urges Christians to add to their faith manliness,
courage, heroism (<emph>2 Pet. 1:5&mdash;<q>in your faith supply virtue</q></emph>), and Paul declares the state to
be God's ordinance (<emph>Rom. 13:1&mdash;<q>Let every soul be in subjection to the higher powers: for there is no power
but of God; and the powers that be are ordained of God</q></emph>). Patriotic defence of a nation's unity
and freedom has always found its chief incitement and ground in these injunctions of
Scripture. E. G. Robinson: <q>Christian ethics do not contain a particle of chaff,&mdash;all
is pure wheat.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Its spirituality,&mdash;accepting no merely external conformity to right
precepts, but judging all action by the thoughts and motives from which it
springs.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The superficiality of heathen morals is well illustrated by the treatment of the
corpse of a priest in Siam: the body is covered with gold leaf, and then is left to rot and
shine. Heathenism divorces religion from ethics. External and ceremonial observances
take the place of purity of heart. The Sermon on the Mount on the other hand
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
pronounces blessing only upon inward states of the soul. <emph>Ps. 51:6&mdash;<q>Behold, thou desirest
truth in the inward parts, and in the hidden part thou wilt make me to know wisdom</q></emph>; <emph>Micah 6:8&mdash;<q>what doth
Jehovah require of thee, but to do justly, and to love kindness, and to walk humbly with thy God?</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Its simplicity,&mdash;inculcating principles rather than imposing rules;
reducing these principles to an organic system; and connecting this system
with religion by summing up all human duty in the one command of love
to God and man.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Christianity presents no extensive code of rules, like that of the Pharisees or of the
Jesuits. Such codes break down of their own weight. The laws of the State of New
York alone constitute a library of themselves, which only the trained lawyer can
master. It is said that Mohammedanism has recorded sixty-five thousand special
instances in which the reader is directed to do right. It is the merit of Jesus' system
that all its requisitions are reduced to unity. <emph>Mark 12:29-31&mdash;<q>Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God, the
Lord is one: and thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and
with all thy strength. The second is this: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. There is none other commandment
greater than these.</q></emph> Wendt, Teaching of Jesus, 2:384-814, calls attention to the inner unity
of Jesus' teaching. The doctrine that God is a loving Father is applied with unswerving
consistency. Jesus confirmed whatever was true in the O. T., and he set aside the
unworthy. He taught not so much about God, as about the kingdom of God, and
about the ideal fellowship between God and men. Morality was the necessary and
natural expression of religion. In Christ teaching and life were perfectly blended. He
was the representative of the religion which he taught.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Its practicality,&mdash;exemplifying its precepts in the life of Jesus
Christ; and, while it declares man's depravity and inability in his own
strength to keep the law, furnishing motives to obedience, and the divine
aid of the Holy Spirit to make this obedience possible.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Revelation has two sides: Moral law, and provision for fulfilling the moral law that
has been broken. Heathen systems can incite to temporary reformations, and they
can terrify with fears of retribution. But only God's regenerating grace can make
the tree good, in such a way that its fruit will be good also (<emph>Mat. 12:33</emph>). There is a difference
between touching the pendulum of the clock and winding it up,&mdash;the former
may set it temporarily swinging, but only the latter secures its regular and permanent
motion. The moral system of the N. T. is not simply law,&mdash;it is also grace: <emph>John 1:17&mdash;<q>the
law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.</q></emph> Dr. William Ashmore's
tract represents a Chinaman in a pit. Confucius looks into the pit and says: <q>If you
had done as I told you, you would never have gotten in.</q> Buddha looks into the pit
and says: <q>If you were up here I would show you what to do.</q> So both Confucius
and Buddha pass on. But Jesus leaps down into the pit and helps the poor Chinaman
out.
</p>

<p>
At the Parliament of Religions in Chicago there were many ideals of life propounded,
but no religion except Christianity attempted to show that there was any power given
to realize these ideals. When Joseph Cook challenged the priests of the ancient
religions to answer Lady Macbeth's question: <q>How cleanse this red right hand?</q>
the priests were dumb. But Christianity declares that <emph><q>the blood of Jesus his Son cleanseth us
from all sin</q> (1 John 1:7)</emph>. E. G. Robinson: Christianity differs from all other religions in
being (1) a historical religion; (2) in turning abstract law into a person to be loved;
(3) in furnishing a demonstration of God's love in Christ; (4) in providing atonement
for sin and forgiveness for the sinner; (5) in giving a power to fulfil the law
and sanctify the life. Bowne, Philos. of Theism, 249&mdash;<q>Christianity, by making the
moral law the expression of a holy Will, brought that law out of its impersonal
abstraction, and assured its ultimate triumph. Moral principles may be what they were
before, but moral practice is forever different. Even the earth itself has another look,
now that it has heaven above it.</q> Frances Power Cobbe, Life, 92&mdash;<q>The achievement
of Christianity was not the inculcation of a <emph>new</emph>, still less of a <emph>systematic</emph>, morality;
but the introduction of a new <emph>spirit</emph> into morality; as Christ himself said, a leaven
into the lump.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We may justly argue that a moral system so pure and perfect, since it
surpasses all human powers of invention and runs counter to men's natural
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
tastes and passions, must have had a supernatural, and if a supernatural,
then a divine, origin.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Heathen systems of morality are in general defective, in that they furnish for man's
moral action no sufficient example, rule, motive, or end. They cannot do this, for the
reason that they practically identify God with nature, and know of no clear revelation
of his holy will. Man is left to the law of his own being, and since he is not conceived
of as wholly responsible and free, the lower impulses are allowed sway as well as the
higher, and selfishness is not regarded as sin. As heathendom does not recognize man's
depravity, so it does not recognize his dependence upon divine grace, and its virtue is
self-righteousness. Heathenism is man's vain effort to lift himself to God; Christianity
is God's coming down to man to save him; see Gunsaulus, Transfig. of Christ, 11, 12.
Martineau, 1:15, 16, calls attention to the difference between the physiological ethics
of heathendom and the psychological ethics of Christianity. Physiological ethics begins
with nature; and, finding in nature the uniform rule of necessity and the operation
of cause and effect, it comes at last to man and applies the same rule to him, thus
extinguishing all faith in personality, freedom, responsibility, sin and guilt. Psychological
ethics, on the contrary, wisely begins with what we know best, with man; and
finding in him free-will and a moral purpose, it proceeds outward to nature and interprets
nature as the manifestation of the mind and will of God.
</p>

<p>
<q>Psychological ethics are altogether peculiar to Christendom.... Other systems
begin outside and regard the soul as a homogeneous part of the <emph>universe</emph>, applying
to the soul the principle of necessity that prevails outside of it.... In the Christian
religion, on the other hand, the interest, the mystery of the world are concentrated in
<emph>human nature</emph>.... The sense of sin&mdash;a sentiment that left no trace in Athens&mdash;involves
a consciousness of personal alienation from the Supreme Goodness; the aspiration
after holiness directs itself to a union of affection and will with the source of
all Perfection; the agency for transforming men from their old estrangement to new
reconciliation is a Person, in whom the divine and human historically blend; and
the sanctifying Spirit by which they are sustained at the height of their purer life
is a living link of communion between their minds and the Soul of souls.... So
Nature, to the Christian consciousness, sank into the accidental and the neutral.</q>
Measuring ourselves by human standards, we nourish pride; measuring ourselves
by divine standards, we nourish humility. Heathen nations, identifying God with
nature or with man, are unprogressive. The flat architecture of the Parthenon, with
its lines parallel to the earth, is the type of heathen religion; the aspiring arches of the
Gothic cathedral symbolize Christianity.
</p>

<p>
Sterrett, Studies in Hegel, 33, says that Hegel characterized the Chinese religion as
that of Measure, or temperate conduct; Brahmanism as that of Phantasy, or inebriate
dream-life; Buddhism as that of Self-involvement; that of Egypt as the imbruted
religion of Enigma, symbolized by the Sphynx; that of Greece, as the religion of
Beauty; the Jewish as that of Sublimity; and Christianity as the Absolute religion, the
fully revealed religion of truth and freedom. In all this Hegel entirely fails to grasp the
elements of Will, Holiness, Love, Life, which characterize Judaism and Christianity,
and distinguish them from all other religions. R. H. Hutton: <q>Judaism taught us
that Nature must be interpreted by our knowledge of God, not God by our knowledge
of Nature.</q> Lyman Abbott: <q>Christianity is not a new <emph>life</emph>, but a new <emph>power</emph>; not a
<emph>summons</emph> to a new life, but an <emph>offer</emph> of new life; not a reënactment of the old law,
but a power of God unto salvation; not love to God and man, but Christ's message that
God loves us, and will help us to the life of love.</q>
</p>

<p>
Beyschlag, N. T. Theology, 5, 6&mdash;<q>Christianity postulates an opening of the heart of
the eternal God to the heart of man coming to meet him. Heathendom shows us the
heart of man blunderingly grasping the hem of God's garment, and mistaking Nature,
his majestic raiment, for himself. Only in the Bible does man press beyond God's
external manifestations to God himself.</q> See Wuttke, Christian Ethics, 1:37-173;
Porter, in Present Day Tracts, 4: no. 19, pp. 33-64: Blackie, Four Phases of Morals;
Faiths of the World (St. Giles Lectures, second series); J. F. Clarke, Ten Great Religions,
2:280-317; Garbett, Dogmatic Faith; Farrar, Witness of History to Christ, 134,
and Seekers after God, 181, 182, 320; Curtis on Inspiration, 288. For denial of the all-comprehensive
character of Christian Morality, see John Stuart Mill, on Liberty; <hi rend='italic'>per
contra</hi>, see Review of Mill, in Theol. Eclectic, 6:508-512; Row, in Strivings for the
Faith, pub. by Christian Evidence Society, 181-220; also, Bampton Lectures, 1877:130-176;
Fisher, Beginnings of Christianity, 28-38, 174.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>

<p>
In contrast with the Christian system of morality the defects of heathen
systems are so marked and fundamental, that they constitute a strong
corroborative evidence of the divine origin of the Scripture revelation. We
therefore append certain facts and references with regard to particular
heathen systems.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Confucianism.</hi> Confucius (<foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>Kung-fu-tse</foreign>), B. C. 551-478, contemporary with Pythagoras
and Buddha. Socrates was born ten years after Confucius died. Mencius (371-278)
was a disciple of Confucius. Matheson, in Faiths of the World (St. Giles Lectures),
73-108, claims that Confucianism was <q>an attempt to substitute a morality for theology.</q>
Legge, however, in Present Day Tracts, 3: no. 18, shows that this is a mistake. Confucius
simply left religion where he found it. God, or Heaven, is worshiped in China,
but only by the Emperor. Chinese religion is apparently a survival of the worship of
the patriarchal family. The father of the family was its only head and priest. In China,
though the family widened into the tribe, and the tribe into the nation, the father still
retained his sole authority, and, as the father of his people, the Emperor alone officially
offered sacrifice to God. Between God and the people the gulf has so widened that the
people may be said to have no practical knowledge of God or communication with him.
Dr. W. A. P. Martin: <q>Confucianism has degenerated into a pantheistic medley, and renders
worship to an impersonal <q>anima mundi,</q> under the leading forms of visible nature.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dr. William Ashmore, private letter: <q>The common people of China have: (1)
Ancestor-worship, and the worship of deified heroes: (2) Geomancy, or belief in
the controlling power of the elements of nature; but back of these, and antedating
them, is (3) the worship of Heaven and Earth, or Father and Mother, a very ancient
dualism; this belongs to the common people also, though once a year the Emperor,
as a sort of high-priest of his people, offers sacrifice on the altar of Heaven; in this
he acts alone. <q>Joss</q> is not a Chinese word at all. It is the corrupted form of the
Portuguese word <q>Deos.</q> The word <q>pidgin</q> is similarly an attempt to say <q>business</q>
(big-i-ness or bidgin). <q>Joss-pidgin</q> therefore means simply <q>divine service,</q> or service
offered to Heaven and Earth, or to spirits of any kind, good or bad. There are many
gods, a Queen of Heaven, King of Hades, God of War, god of literature, gods of the hills,
valleys, streams, a goddess of small-pox, of child-bearing, and all the various trades
have their gods. The most lofty expression the Chinese have is <q>Heaven,</q> or <q>Supreme
Heaven,</q> or <q>Azure Heaven.</q> This is the surviving indication that in the most remote
times they had knowledge of one supreme, intelligent and personal Power who ruled
over all.</q> Mr. Yugoro Chiba has shown that the Chinese classics permit sacrifice by all
the people. But it still remains true that sacrifice to <q>Supreme Heaven</q> is practically
confined to the Emperor, who like the Jewish high-priest offers for his people once a
year.
</p>

<p>
Confucius did nothing to put morality upon a religious basis. In practice, the relations
between man and man are the only relations considered. Benevolence, righteousness,
propriety, wisdom, sincerity, are enjoined, but not a word is said with regard to
man's relations to God. Love to God is not only not commanded&mdash;it is not thought of
as possible. Though man's being is theoretically an ordinance of God, man is practically
a law to himself. The first commandment of Confucius is that of filial piety. But this
includes worship of dead ancestors, and is so exaggerated as to bury from sight the
related duties of husband to wife and of parent to child. Confucius made it the duty of
a son to slay his father's murderer, just as Moses insisted on a strictly retaliatory
penalty for bloodshed; see J. A. Farrer, Primitive Manners and Customs, 80. He
treated invisible and superior beings with respect, but held them at a distance. He
recognized the <q>Heaven</q> of tradition; but, instead of adding to our knowledge of it,
he stifled inquiry. Dr. Legge: <q>I have been reading Chinese books for more than
forty years, and any general requirement to love God, or the mention of any one
as actually loving him, has yet to come for the first time under my eye.</q>
</p>

<p>
Ezra Abbot asserts that Confucius gave the golden rule in positive as well as negative
form; see Harris, Philos. Basis of Theism, 222. This however seems to be denied
by Dr. Legge, Religions of China, 1-58. Wu Ting Fang, former Chinese minister to
Washington, assents to the statement that Confucius gave the golden rule only in its
negative form, and he says this difference is the difference between a passive and an
aggressive civilization, which last is therefore dominant. The golden rule, as Confucius
gives it, is: <q>Do not unto others that which you would not they should do unto
you.</q> Compare with this, Isocrates: <q>Be to your parents what you would have your
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
children be to you.... Do not to others the things which make you angry when others
do them to you</q>; Herodotus: <q>What I punish in another man, I will myself, as far as
I can, refrain from</q>; Aristotle: <q>We should behave toward our friends as we should
wish them to behave toward us</q>; Tobit, 4:15&mdash;<q>What thou hatest, do to no one</q>;
Philo: <q>What one hates to endure, let him not do</q>; Seneca bids us <q>give as we wish
to receive</q>; Rabbi Hillel: <q>Whatsoever is hateful to you, do not to another; this is
the whole law, and all the rest is explanation.</q>
</p>

<p>
Broadus, in Am. Com. on Matthew, 161&mdash;<q>The sayings of Confucius, Isocrates, and
the three Jewish teachers, are merely negative; that of Seneca is confined to giving,
and that of Aristotle to the treatment of friends. Christ lays down a rule for positive
action, and that toward all men.</q> He teaches that I am bound to do to others all that
they could rightly desire me to do to them. The golden rule therefore requires a supplement,
to show what others can rightly desire, namely, God's glory first, and their
good as second and incidental thereto. Christianity furnishes this divine and perfect
standard; Confucianism is defective in that it has no standard higher than human convention.
While Confucianism excludes polytheism, idolatry, and deification of vice,
it is a shallow and tantalizing system, because it does not recognize the hereditary corruption
of human nature, or furnish any remedy for moral evil except the <q>doctrines
of the sages.</q> <q>The heart of man,</q> it says, <q>is naturally perfectly upright and correct.</q>
Sin is simply <q>a disease, to be cured by self-discipline; a debt, to be canceled
by meritorious acts; an ignorance, to be removed by study and contemplation.</q> See
Bib. Sac., 1883:292, 293; N. Englander, 1883:565; Marcus Dods, in Erasmus and other
Essays, 239.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Indian Systems.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Brahmanism</hi>, as expressed in the Vedas, dates back to
1000-1500 B. C. As Caird (in Faiths of the World, St. Giles Lectures, lecture 1) has shown,
it originated in the contemplation of the power in nature apart from the moral Personality
that works in and through nature. Indeed we may say that all heathenism is
man's choice of a non-moral in place of a moral God. Brahmanism is a system of pantheism,
<q>a false or illegitimate consecration of the finite.</q> All things are a manifestation
of Brahma. Hence evil is deified as well as good. And many thousand gods are
worshiped as partial representations of the living principle which moves through all.
<q>How many gods have the Hindus?</q> asked Dr. Duff of his class. Henry Drummond
thought there were about twenty-five. <q>Twenty-five?</q> responded the indignant professor;
<q>twenty-five millions of millions!</q> While the early Vedas present a comparatively
pure nature-worship, later Brahmanism becomes a worship of the vicious and
the vile, of the unnatural and the cruel. Juggernaut and the suttee did not belong to
original Hindu religion.
</p>

<p>
Bruce, Apologetics, 15&mdash;<q>Pantheism in theory always means polytheism in practice.</q>
The early Vedas are hopeful in spirit; later Brahmanism is a religion of disappointment.
Caste is fixed and consecrated as a manifestation of God. Originally intended to
express, in its four divisions of priest, soldier, agriculturist, slave, the different degrees
of unworldliness and divine indwelling, it becomes an iron fetter to prevent all aspiration
and progress. Indian religion sought to exalt receptivity, the unity of existence,
and rest from self-determination and its struggles. Hence it ascribed to its gods the
same character as nature-forces. God was the common source of good and of evil. Its
ethics is an ethics of moral indifference. Its charity is a charity for sin, and the temperance
it desires is a temperance that will let the intemperate alone. Mozoomdar, for
example, is ready to welcome everything in Christianity but its reproof of sin and its
demand for righteousness. Brahmanism degrades woman, but it deifies the cow.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Buddhism</hi>, beginning with Buddha, 600 B. C., <q>recalls the mind to its elevation above
the finite,</q> from which Brahmanism had fallen away. Buddha was in certain respects
a reformer. He protested against caste, and proclaimed that truth and morality are for
all. Hence Buddhism, through its possession of this one grain of truth, appealed to
the human heart, and became, next to Christianity, the greatest missionary religion.
Notice then, first, its <emph>universalism</emph>. But notice also that this is a false universalism,
for it ignores individualism and leads to universal stagnation and slavery. While Christianity
is a religion of history, of will, of optimism, Buddhism is a religion of illusion,
of quietism, of pessimism; see Nash, Ethics and Revelation, 107-109. In characterizing
Buddhism as a missionary religion, we must notice, secondly, its element of <emph>altruism</emph>.
But this altruism is one which destroys the self, instead of preserving it. The future
Buddha, out of compassion for a famished tiger, permits the tiger to devour him.
<q>Incarnated as a hare, he jumps into the fire to cook himself for a meal for a beggar,&mdash;having
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
previously shaken himself three times, so that none of the insects in his fur
should perish with him</q>; see William James, Varieties of Religious Experience, 283.
Buddha would deliver man, not by philosophy, nor by asceticism, but by self-renunciation.
All isolation and personality are sin, the guilt of which rests, however, not on
man, but on existence in general.
</p>

<p>
While Brahmanism is pantheistic, Buddhism is atheistic in its spirit. Pfleiderer, Philos.
Religion, 1:285&mdash;<q>The Brahmanic Akosmism, that had explained the world as mere
seeming, led to the Buddhistic Atheism.</q> Finiteness and separateness are evil, and the
only way to purity and rest is by ceasing to exist. This is essential pessimism. The
highest morality is to endure that which must be, and to escape from reality and from
personal existence as soon as possible. Hence the doctrine of <foreign lang='sa' rend='italic'>Nirvana</foreign>. Rhys Davids,
in his Hibbert Lectures, claims that early Buddhism meant by <foreign lang='sa' rend='italic'>Nirvana</foreign>, not annihilation,
but the extinction of the self-life, and that this was attainable during man's present
mortal existence. But the term <foreign lang='sa' rend='italic'>Nirvana</foreign> now means, to the great mass of those who
use it, the loss of all personality and consciousness, and absorption into the general life
of the universe. Originally the term denoted only freedom from individual desire, and
those who had entered into <foreign lang='sa' rend='italic'>Nirvana</foreign> might again come out of it; see Ireland, Blot on
the Brain, 238. But even in its original form, <foreign lang='sa' rend='italic'>Nirvana</foreign> was sought only from a selfish
motive. Self-renunciation and absorption in the whole was not the enthusiasm of
benevolence,&mdash;it was the refuge of despair. It is a religion without god or sacrifice.
Instead of communion with a personal God, Buddhism has in prospect only an extinction
of personality, as reward for untold ages of lonely self-conquest, extending through
many transmigrations. Of Buddha it has been truly said <q>That all the all he had for
needy man Was nothing, and his best of being was But not to be.</q> Wilkinson, Epic of
Paul, 296&mdash;<q>He by his own act dying all the time, In ceaseless effort utterly to cease,
Will willing not to will, desire desiring To be desire no more, until at last The fugitive
go free, emancipate But by becoming naught.</q> Of Christ Bruce well says: <q>What a
contrast this Healer of disease and Preacher of pardon to the worst, to Buddha, with
his religion of despair!</q>
</p>

<p>
Buddhism is also fatalistic. It inculcates submission and compassion&mdash;merely negative
virtues. But it knows nothing of manly freedom, or of active love&mdash;the positive
virtues of Christianity. It leads men to spare others, but not to help them. Its morality
revolves around self, not around God. It has in it no organizing principle, for it
recognizes no God, no inspiration, no soul, no salvation, no personal immortality.
Buddhism would save men only by inducing them to flee from existence. To the
Hindu, family life involves sin. The perfect man must forsake wife and children. All
gratification of natural appetites and passions is evil. Salvation is not from sin, but
from desire, and from this men can be saved only by escaping from life itself. Christianity
buries sin, but saves the man; Buddha would save the man by killing him.
Christianity symbolizes the convert's entrance upon a new life by raising him from the
baptismal waters; the baptism of Buddhism should be immersion without emersion.
The fundamental idea of Brahmanism, extinction of personality, remains the same in
Buddhism; the only difference being that the result is secured by active atonement in
the former, by passive contemplation in the latter. Virtue, and the knowledge that
everything earthly is a vanishing spark of the original light, delivers man from
existence and from misery.
</p>

<p>
Prof. G. H. Palmer, of Harvard, in The Outlook, June 19, 1897&mdash;<q>Buddhism is unlike
Christianity in that it abolishes misery by abolishing desire; denies personality instead
of asserting it; has many gods, but no one God who is living and conscious; makes a
shortening of existence rather than a lengthening of it to be the reward of righteousness.
Buddhism makes no provision for family, church, state, science, or art. It
gives us a religion that is little, when we want one that is large.</q> Dr. E. Benjamin
Andrews: <q>Schopenhauer and Spencer are merely teachers of Buddhism. They
regard the central source of all as unknowable force, instead of regarding it as a
Spirit, living and holy. This takes away all impulse to scientific investigation. We
need to start from a Person, and not from a thing.</q>
</p>

<p>
For comparison of the sage of India, Sakya Muni, more commonly called Buddha
(properly <q>the Buddha</q> = the enlightened; but who, in spite of Edwin Arnold's
<q>Light of Asia,</q> is represented as not pure from carnal pleasures before he began his
work), with Jesus Christ, see Bib. Sac., July, 1882:458-498; W. C. Wilkinson, Edwin
Arnold, Poetizer and Paganizer; Kellogg, The Light of Asia and the Light of the
World. Buddhism and Christianity are compared in Presb. Rev., July, 1883:505-548;
Wuttke, Christian Ethics, 1:47-54; Mitchell, in Present Day Tracts, 6: no. 33. See also
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
Oldenberg, Buddha; Lillie, Popular Life of Buddha; Beal, Catena of Buddhist Scriptures,
153&mdash;<q>Buddhism declares itself ignorant of any mode of personal existence compatible
with the idea of spiritual perfection, and so far it is ignorant of God</q>; 157&mdash;<q>The
earliest idea of <foreign lang='sa' rend='italic'>Nirvana</foreign> seems to have included in it no more than the enjoyment
of a state of rest consequent on the extinction of all causes of sorrow.</q> The impossibility
of satisfying the human heart with a system of atheism is shown by the fact
that the Buddha himself has been apotheosized to furnish an object of worship. Thus
Buddhism has reverted to Brahmanism.
</p>

<p>
Monier Williams: <q>Mohammed has as much claim to be <q>the Light of Asia</q> as
Buddha has. What light from Buddha? Not about the heart's depravity, or the origin
of sin, or the goodness, justice, holiness, fatherhood of God, or the remedy for sin, but
only the ridding self from suffering by ridding self from life&mdash;a doctrine of merit, of
self-trust, of pessimism, and annihilation of personality.</q> Christ, himself personal,
loving and holy, shows that God is a person of holiness and love. Robert Browning:
<q>He that created love, shall not he love?</q> Only because Jesus is God, have we a
gospel for the world. The claim that Buddha is <q>the Light of Asia</q> reminds one of
the man who declared the moon to be of greater value than the sun, because it gives
light in the darkness when it is needed, while the sun gives light in the daytime when
it is not needed.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Greek Systems.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Pythagoras</hi> (584-504) based morality upon the principle of
numbers. <q>Moral good was identified with unity; evil with multiplicity; virtue was
harmony of the soul and its likeness to God. The aim of life was to make it represent
the beautiful order of the Universe. The whole practical tendency of Pythagoreanism
was ascetic, and included a strict self-control and an earnest culture.</q> Here
already we seem to see the defect of Greek morality in confounding the good with the
beautiful, and in making morality a mere self-development. Matheson, Messages of
the Old Religions: Greece reveals the intensity of the hour, the value of the present
life, the beauty of the world that now is. Its religion is the religion of beautiful
humanity. It anticipates the new heaven and the new earth. Rome on the other
hand stood for union, incorporation, a universal kingdom. But its religion deified
only the Emperor, not all humanity. It was the religion, not of love, but of power,
and it identified the church with the state.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Socrates</hi> (469-400) made knowledge to be virtue. Morality consisted in subordinating
irrational desires to rational knowledge. Although here we rise above a subjectively
determined good as the goal of moral effort, we have no proper sense of sin. Knowledge,
and not love, is the motive. If men know the right, they will do the right.
This is a great overvaluing of knowledge. With Socrates, teaching is a sort of midwifery&mdash;not
depositing information in the mind, but drawing out the contents of our
own inner consciousness. Lewis Morris describes it as the life-work of Socrates
to <q>doubt our doubts away.</q> Socrates holds it right to injure one's enemies. He
shows proud self-praise in his dying address. He warns against pederasty, yet compromises
with it. He does not insist upon the same purity of family life which
Homer describes in Ulysses and Penelope. Charles Kingsley, in Alton Locke, remarks
that the spirit of the Greek tragedy was 'man mastered by circumstance'; that of
modern tragedy is <q>man mastering circumstance.</q> But the Greek tragedians, while
showing man thus mastered, do still represent him as inwardly free, as in the case
of Prometheus, and this sense of human freedom and responsibility appears to some
extent in Socrates.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi> (430-348) held that morality is pleasure in the good, as the truly beautiful, and
that knowledge produces virtue. The good is likeness to God,&mdash;here we have glimpses
of an extra-human goal and model. The body, like all matter, being inherently evil, is
a hindrance to the soul,&mdash;here we have a glimpse of hereditary depravity. But Plato
<q>reduced moral evil to the category of natural evil.</q> He failed to recognize God as
creator and master of matter; failed to recognize man's depravity as due to his own
apostasy from God; failed to found morality on the divine will rather than on man's
own consciousness. He knew nothing of a common humanity, and regarded virtue as
only for the few. As there was no common sin, so there was no common redemption.
Plato thought to reach God by intellect alone, when only conscience and heart could
lead to him. He believed in a freedom of the soul in a preëxistent state where a
choice was made between good and evil, but he believed that, after that antemundane
decision had been made, the fates determined men's acts and lives irreversibly. Reason
drives two horses, appetite and emotion, but their course has been predetermined.
</p>

<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>

<p>
Man acts as reason prompts. All sin is ignorance. There is nothing in this life but
determinism. Martineau, Types, 13, 48, 49, 78, 88&mdash;Plato in general has no proper notion
of responsibility; he reduces moral evil to the category of natural evil. His Ideas with
one exception are not causes. Cause is mind, and mind is the Good. The Good is
the apex and crown of Ideas. The Good is the highest Idea, and this highest Idea is
a Cause. Plato has a feeble conception of personality, whether in God or in man.
Yet God is a person in whatever sense man is a person, and man's personality is reflective
self-consciousness. Will in God or man is not so clear. The Right is dissolved into
the Good. Plato advocated infanticide and the killing off of the old and the helpless.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi> (384-322) leaves out of view even the element of God-likeness and antemundane
evil which Plato so dimly recognized, and makes morality the fruit of mere
rational self-consciousness. He grants evil proclivities, but he refuses to call them
immoral. He advocates a certain freedom of will, and he recognizes inborn tendencies
which war against this freedom, but how these tendencies originated he cannot
say, nor how men may be delivered from them. Not all can be moral; the majority
must be restrained by fear. He finds in God no motive, and love to God is not so
much as mentioned as the source of moral action. A proud, composed, self-centered,
and self-contained man is his ideal character. See Nicomachean Ethics, 7:6, and 10:10;
Wuttke, Christian Ethics, 1:92-126. Alexander, Theories of Will, 39-54&mdash;Aristotle
held that desire and reason are the springs of action. Yet he did not hold that knowledge
of itself would make men virtuous. He was a determinist. Actions are free
only in the sense of being devoid of external compulsion. He viewed slavery as
both rational and right. Butcher, Aspects of Greek Genius, 76&mdash;<q>While Aristotle
attributed to the State a more complete personality than it really possessed, he did
not grasp the depth and meaning of the personality of the individual.</q> A. H. Strong,
Christ in Creation, 289&mdash;Aristotle had no conception of the unity of humanity. His doctrine
of unity did not extend beyond the State. <q>He said that <q>the whole is before the
parts,</q> but he meant by <q>the whole</q> only the pan-Hellenic world, the commonwealth of
Greeks; he never thought of humanity, and the word <q>mankind</q> never fell from his
lips. He could not understand the unity of humanity, because he knew nothing of
Christ, its organizing principle.</q> On Aristotle's conception of God, see James Ten
Broeke, in Bap. Quar. Rev., Jan. 1892&mdash;God is recognized as personal, yet he is only the
Greek Reason, and not the living, loving, providential Father of the Hebrew revelation.
Aristotle substitutes the logical for the dynamical in his dealing with the divine causality.
God is thought, not power.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Epicurus</hi> (342-270) regarded happiness, the subjective feeling of pleasure, as the highest
criterion of truth and good. A prudent calculating for prolonged pleasure is
the highest wisdom. He regards only this life. Concern for retribution and for a future
existence is folly. If there are gods, they have no concern for men. <q>Epicurus, on
pretense of consulting for their ease, complimented the gods, and bowed them out
of existence.</q> Death is the falling apart of material atoms and the eternal cessation of
consciousness. The miseries of this life are due to imperfection in the fortuitously
constructed universe. The more numerous these undeserved miseries, the greater our
right to seek pleasure. Alexander, Theories of the Will, 55-75&mdash;The Epicureans held
that the soul is composed of atoms, yet that the will is free. The atoms of the soul are
excepted from the law of cause and effect. An atom may decline or deviate in the
universal descent, and this is the Epicurean idea of freedom. This indeterminism was
held by all the Greek sceptics, materialists though they were.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeno</hi>, the founder of the Stoic philosophy (340-264), regarded virtue as the only good.
Thought is to subdue nature. The free spirit is self-legislating, self-dependent, self-sufficient.
Thinking, not feeling, is the criterion of the true and the good. Pleasure is
the consequence, not the end of moral action. There is an irreconcilable antagonism of
existence. Man cannot reform the world, but he can make himself perfect. Hence an
unbounded pride in virtue. The sage never repents. There is not the least recognition
of the moral corruption of mankind. There is no objective divine ideal, or revealed
divine will. The Stoic discovers moral law only within, and never suspects his own
moral perversion. Hence he shows self-control and justice, but never humility or love.
He needs no compassion or forgiveness, and he grants none to others. Virtue is not
an actively outworking character, but a passive resistance to irrational reality. Man
may retreat into himself. The Stoic is indifferent to pleasure and pain, not because he
believes in a divine government, or in a divine love for mankind, but as a proud defiance
of the irrational world. He has no need of God or of redemption. As the Epicurean
gives himself to enjoyment of the world, the Stoic gives himself to contempt of the
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
world. In all afflictions, each can say, <q>The door is open.</q> To the Epicurean, the
refuge is intoxication; to the Stoic, the refuge is suicide: <q>If the house smokes, quit
it.</q> Wuttke, Christian Ethics, 1:62-161, from whom much of this account of the
Greeks systems is condensed, describes Epicureanism and Stoicism as alike making
morality subjective, although Epicureanism regarded spirit as determined by nature,
while Stoicism regarded nature as determined by spirit.
</p>

<p>
The Stoics were materialists and pantheists. Though they speak of a personal God,
this is a figure of speech. False opinion is at the root of all vice. Chrysippus denied
what we now call the liberty of indifference, saying that there could not be an effect
without a cause. Man is enslaved to passion. The Stoics could not explain how a
vicious man could become virtuous. The result is apathy. Men act only according to
character, and this a doctrine of fate. The Stoic indifference or apathy in misfortune
is not a bearing of it at all, but rather a cowardly retreat from it. It is in the actual
suffering of evil that Christianity finds <q>the soul of good.</q> The office of misfortune is
disciplinary and purifying; see Seth, Ethical Principles, 417. <q>The shadow of the
sage's self, projected on vacancy, was called God, and, as the sage had long since
abandoned interest in practical life, he expected his Divinity to do the same.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Stoic reverenced God just because of his unapproachable majesty. Christianity
sees in God a Father, a Redeemer, a carer for our minute wants, a deliverer from
our sin. It teaches us to see in Christ the humanity of the divine, affinity with
God, God's supreme interest in his handiwork. For the least of his creatures Christ
died. Kinship with God gives dignity to man. The individuality that Stoicism
lost in the whole, Christianity makes the end of the creation. The State exists to
develop and promote it. Paul took up and infused new meaning into certain phrases of
the Stoic philosophy about the freedom and royalty of the wise man, just as John
adopted and glorified certain phrases of Alexandrian philosophy about the Word.
Stoicism was lonely and pessimistic. The Stoics said that the best thing was not to
be born; the next best thing was to die. Because Stoicism had no God of helpfulness
and sympathy, its virtue was mere conformity to nature, majestic egoism and
self-complacency. In the Roman <hi rend='italic'>Epictetus</hi> (89), <hi rend='italic'>Seneca</hi> (65), and <hi rend='italic'>Marcus Aurelius</hi>
(121-180), the religious element comes more into the foreground, and virtue appears
once more as God-likeness; but it is possible that this later Stoicism was influenced
by Christianity. On Marcus Aurelius, see New Englander, July, 1881:415-431; Capes,
Stoicism.
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Systems of Western Asia.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Zoroaster</hi> (1000 B. C. ?), the founder of the Parsees,
was a dualist, at least so far as to explain the existence of evil and of good by the original
presence in the author of all things of two opposing principles. Here is evidently
a limit put upon the sovereignty and holiness of God. Man is not perfectly dependent
upon him, nor is God's will an unconditional law for his creatures. As opposed to the
Indian systems, Zoroaster's insistence upon the divine personality furnished a far
better basis for a vigorous and manly morality. Virtue was to be won by hard struggle
of free beings against evil. But then, on the other hand, this evil was conceived as
originally due, not to finite beings themselves, but either to an evil deity who warred
against the good, or to an evil principle in the one deity himself. The burden of guilt
is therefore shifted from man to his maker. Morality becomes subjective and unsettled.
Not love to God or imitation of God, but rather self-love and self-development,
furnish the motive and aim of morality. No fatherhood or love is recognized in the
deity, and other things besides God (<hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, fire) are worshiped. There can be no depth
to the consciousness of sin, and no hope of divine deliverance.
</p>

<p>
It is the one merit of Parseeism that it recognizes the moral conflict of the world; its
error is that it carries this moral conflict into the very nature of God. We can apply
to Parseeism the words of the Conference of Foreign Mission Boards to the Buddhists of
Japan: <q>All religions are expressions of man's sense of dependence, but only one provides
fellowship with God. All religions speak of a higher truth, but only one speaks
of that truth as found in a loving personal God, our Father. All religions show man's
helplessness, but only one tells of a divine Savior, who offers to man forgiveness of sin,
and salvation through his death, and who is now a living person, working in and with
all who believe in him, to make them holy and righteous and pure.</q> Matheson, Messages
of Old Religions, says that Parseeism recognizes an obstructive element in the
nature of God himself. Moral evil is reality; but there is no reconciliation, nor is it
shown that all things work together for good. See Wuttke, Christian Ethics, 1:47-54;
Faiths of the World (St. Giles Lectures), 109-144; Mitchell, in Present Day Tracts, 3:
no. 25; Whitney on the Avesta, in Oriental and Linguistic Studies.
</p>

<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mohammed</hi> (570-632 A. D.), the founder of Islam, gives us in the Koran a system
containing four dogmas of fundamental immorality, namely, polygamy, slavery, persecution,
and suppression of private judgement. Mohammedanism is heathenism in
monotheistic form. Its good points are its conscientiousness and its relation to God.
It has prospered because it has preached the unity of God, and because it is a book-religion.
But both these it got from Judaism and Christianity. It has appropriated
the Old Testament saints and even Jesus. But it denies the death of Christ and sees no
need of atonement. The power of sin is not recognized. The idea of sin, in Moslems, is
emptied of all positive content. Sin is simply a falling short, accounted for by the
weakness and shortsightedness of man, inevitable in the fatalistic universe, or not
remembered in wrath by the indulgent and merciful Father. Forgiveness is indulgence,
and the conception of God is emptied of the quality of justice. Evil belongs only
to the individual, not to the race. Man attains the favor of God by good works, based
on prophetic teaching. Morality is not a fruit of salvation, but a means. There is no
penitence or humility, but only self-righteousness; and this self-righteousness is
consistent with great sensuality, unlimited divorce, and with absolute despotism in
family, civil and religious affairs. There is no knowledge of the fatherhood of God or
of the brotherhood of man. In all the Koran, there is no such declaration as that <emph><q>God
so loved the world</q> (John 3:16)</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The submission of Islam is submission to an arbitrary will, not to a God of love.
There is no basing of morality in love. The highest good is the sensuous happiness of
the individual. God and man are external to one another. Mohammed is a teacher but
not a priest. Mozley, Miracles, 140, 141&mdash;<q>Mohammed had no faith in human nature.
There were two things which he thought men could do, and would do, for the glory of
God&mdash;transact religious <emph>forms</emph>, and <emph>fight</emph>, and upon these two points he was severe; but
within the sphere of common practical life, where man's great trial lies, his code exhibits
the disdainful laxity of a legislator who accomodates his rule to the recipient, and
shows his estimate of the recipient by the accommodation which he adopts....
<q>Human nature is weak,</q> said he.</q> Lord Houghton: The Koran is all wisdom, all law,
all religion, for all time. Dead men bow before a dead God. <q>Though the world rolls
on from change to change, And realms of thought expand, The letter stands without
expanse or range, Stiff as a dead man's hand.</q> Wherever Mohammedanism has gone,
it has either found a desert or made one. Fairbairn, in Contemp. Rev., Dec. 1882:866&mdash;<q>The
Koran has frozen Mohammedan thought; to obey is to abandon progress.</q>
Muir, in Present Day Tracts, 3: no. 14&mdash;<q>Mohammedanism reduces men to a dead level
of social depression, despotism, and semi-barbarism. Islam is the work of man; Christianity
of God.</q> See also Faiths of the World (St. Giles Lectures, Second Series), 361-396;
J. F. Clarke, Ten Great Religions, 1:448-488; 280-317; Great Religions of the
World, published by the Harpers; Zwemer, Moslem Doctrine of God.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. The person and character of Christ.</head>

<p>
A. The conception of Christ's person as presenting deity and humanity
indissolubly united, and the conception of Christ's character, with its faultless
and all-comprehending excellence, cannot be accounted for upon any
other hypothesis than that they were historical realities.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The stylobate of the Parthenon at Athens rises about three inches in the middle of
the 101 feet of the front, and four inches in the middle of the 228 feet of the flanks. A
nearly parallel line is found in the entablature. The axes of the columns lean inward
nearly three inches in their height of 34 feet, thus giving a sort of pyramidal character
to the structure. Thus the architect overcame the apparent sagging of horizontal lines,
and at the same time increased the apparent height of the edifice; see Murray, Handbook
of Greece, 5th ed., 1884, 1:308, 309; Ferguson, Handbook of Architecture, 268-270.
The neglect to counteract this optical illusion has rendered the Madeleine in Paris a stiff
and ineffective copy of the Parthenon. The Galilean peasant who should minutely
describe these peculiarities of the Parthenon would prove, not only that the edifice
was a historical reality, but that he had actually seen it. Bruce, Apologetics, 343&mdash;<q>In
reading the memoirs of the evangelists, you feel as one sometimes feels in a picture-gallery.
Your eye alights on the portrait of a person whom you do not know. You
look at it intently for a few moments and then remark to a companion: <q>That must
be like the original,&mdash;it is so life-like.</q></q> Theodore Parker: <q>It would take a Jesus to
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
forge a Jesus.</q> See Row, Bampton Lectures, 1877:178-219, and in Present Day Tracts,
4: no. 22; F. W. Farrar, Witness of History to Christ; Barry, Boyle Lecture on Manifold
Witness for Christ.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) No source can be assigned from which the evangelists could have
derived such a conception. The Hindu avatars were only temporary
unions of deity with humanity. The Greeks had men half-deified, but no
unions of God and man. The monotheism of the Jews found the person
of Christ a perpetual stumbling-block. The Essenes were in principle more
opposed to Christianity than the Rabbinists.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Herbert Spencer, Data of Ethics, 279&mdash;<q>The coëxistence of a perfect man and an
imperfect society is impossible; and could the two coëxist, the resulting conduct would
not furnish the ethical standard sought.</q> We must conclude that the perfect manhood
of Christ is a miracle, and the greatest of miracles. Bruce, Apologetics, 346, 351&mdash;<q>When
Jesus asks: <q>Why callest thou me good?</q> he means: <q>Learn first what goodness
is, and call no man good till you are sure that he deserves it.</q> Jesus' goodness was
entirely free from religious scrupulosity; it was distinguished by humanity; it was full
of modesty and lowliness.... Buddhism has flourished 2000 years, though little is known
of its founder. Christianity might have been so perpetuated, but it is not so. I want
to be sure that the ideal has been embodied in an actual life. Otherwise it is only
poetry, and the obligation to conform to it ceases.</q> For comparison of Christ's incarnation
with Hindu, Greek, Jewish, and Essene ideas, see Dorner, Hist. Doct. Person of
Christ, Introduction. On the Essenes, see Herzog, Encyclop., art,: Essener; Pressensé,
Jesus Christ, Life, Times and Work, 84-87; Lightfoot on Colossians, 349-419; Godet,
Lectures in Defence of the Christian Faith.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) No mere human genius, and much less the genius of Jewish fishermen,
could have originated this conception. Bad men invent only such
characters as they sympathize with. But Christ's character condemns badness.
Such a portrait could not have been drawn without supernatural
aid. But such aid would not have been given to fabrication. The conception
can be explained only by granting that Christ's person and character
were historical realities.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Between Pilate and Titus 30,000 Jews are said to have been crucified around the walls
of Jerusalem. Many of these were young men. What makes one of them stand out on
the pages of history? There are two answers: The character of Jesus was a perfect
character, and, He was God as well as man. Gore, Incarnation, 63&mdash;<q>The Christ of
the gospels, if he be not true to history, represents a combined effort of the creative
imagination without parallel in literature. But the literary characteristics of Palestine
in the first century make the hypothesis of such an effort morally impossible.</q>
The Apocryphal gospels show us what mere imagination was capable of producing.
That the portrait of Christ is not puerile, inane, hysterical, selfishly assertive, and self-contradictory,
can be due only to the fact that it is the photograph from real life.
</p>

<p>
For a remarkable exhibition of the argument from the character of Jesus, see Bushnell,
Nature and the Supernatural, 276-332. Bushnell mentions the originality and vastness
of Christ's plan, yet its simplicity and practical adaptation; his moral traits of
independence, compassion, meekness, wisdom, zeal, humility, patience; the combination
in him of seemingly opposite qualities. With all his greatness, he was condescending
and simple; he was unworldly, yet not austere; he had strong feelings, yet was self-possessed;
he had indignation toward sin, yet compassion toward the sinner; he showed
devotion to his work, yet calmness under opposition; universal philanthropy, yet susceptibility
to private attachments; the authority of a Savior and Judge, yet the gratitude
and the tenderness of a son; the most elevated devotion, yet a life of activity and
exertion. See chapter on The Moral Miracle, in Bruce, Miraculous Element of the
Gospels, 43-78.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The acceptance and belief in the New Testament descriptions of
Jesus Christ cannot be accounted for except upon the ground that the
person and character described had an actual existence.
</p>

<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) If these descriptions were false, there were witnesses still living who
had known Christ and who would have contradicted them. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) There was
no motive to induce acceptance of such false accounts, but every motive to
the contrary. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The success of such falsehoods could be explained only
by supernatural aid, but God would never have thus aided falsehood. This
person and character, therefore, must have been not fictitious but real; and
if real, then Christ's words are true, and the system of which his person
and character are a part is a revelation from God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The counterfeit may for a season Deceive the wide earth; But the lie waxing great
comes to labor, And truth has its birth.</q> Matthew Arnold, The Better Part: <q>Was
Christ a man like us? Ah, let us see, If we then too can be Such men as he!</q> When
the blatant sceptic declared: <q>I do not believe that such a man as Jesus Christ ever
lived,</q> George Warren merely replied: <q>I wish I were like him!</q> Dwight L. Moody
was called a hypocrite, but the stalwart evangelist answered: <q>Well, suppose I am.
How does that make your case any better? I know some pretty mean things about myself;
but you cannot say anything against my Master.</q> Goethe: <q>Let the culture of
the spirit advance forever; let the human spirit broaden itself as it will; yet it will
never go beyond the height and moral culture of Christianity, as it glitters and shines
in the gospels.</q>
</p>

<p>
Renan, Life of Jesus: <q>Jesus founded the absolute religion, excluding nothing,
determining nothing, save its essence.... The foundation of the true religion is indeed
his work. After him, there is nothing left but to develop and fructify.</q> And a Christian
scholar has remarked: <q>It is an astonishing proof of the divine guidance vouchsafed
to the evangelists that no man, of their time or since, has been able to touch the
picture of Christ without debasing it.</q> We may find an illustration of this in the
words of Chadwick, Old and New Unitarianism, 207&mdash;<q>Jesus' doctrine of marriage was
ascetic, his doctrine of property was communistic, his doctrine of charity was sentimental,
his doctrine of non-resistance was such as commends itself to Tolstoi, but not
to many others of our time. With the example of Jesus, it is the same as with his
teachings. Followed unreservedly, would it not justify those who say: <q>The hope
of the race is in its extinction</q>; and bring all our joys and sorrows to a sudden end?</q>
To this we may answer in the words of Huxley, who declares that Jesus Christ is <q>the
noblest ideal of humanity which mankind has yet worshiped.</q> Gordon, Christ of To-Day,
179&mdash;<q>The question is not whether Christ is good enough to represent the Supreme
Being, but whether the Supreme Being is good enough to have Christ for his representative.
John Stuart Mill looks upon the Christian religion as the worship of Christ,
rather than the worship of God, and in this way he explains the beneficence of its
influence.</q>
</p>

<p>
John Stuart Mill, Essays on Religion, 254&mdash;<q>The most valuable part of the effect on
the character which Christianity has produced, by holding up in a divine person a standard
of excellence and a model for imitation, is available even to the absolute unbeliever,
and can never more be lost to humanity. For it is Christ rather than God whom Christianity
has held up to believers as the pattern of perfection for humanity. It is the God
incarnate, more than the God of the Jews or of nature, who, being idealized, has taken
so great and salutary hold on the modern mind. And whatever else may be taken
away from us by rational criticism, Christ is still left: a unique figure, not more unlike
all his precursors than all his followers, even those who had the direct benefit of his
personal preaching.... Who among his disciples, or among their proselytes, was capable
of inventing the sayings ascribed to Jesus, or of imagining the life and character
revealed in the Gospels?... About the life and sayings of Jesus there is a stamp of
personal originality combined with profundity of insight which, if we abandon the
idle expectation of finding scientific precision where something very different was
aimed at, must place the Prophet of Nazareth, even in the estimation of those who have
no belief in his inspiration, in the very first rank of the men of sublime genius of whom
our species can boast. When this preëminent genius is combined with the qualities of
probably the greatest moral reformer and martyr to that mission who ever existed
upon earth, religion cannot be said to have made a bad choice in pitching on this man
as the ideal representative and guide of humanity; nor even now would it be easy, even
for an unbeliever, to find a better translation of the rule of virtue from the abstract
into the concrete than the endeavor so to live that Christ would approve our life.
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
When to this we add that, to the conception of the rational sceptic, it remains a possibility
that Christ actually was ... a man charged with a special, express and unique
commission from God to lead mankind to truth and virtue, we may well conclude that
the influences of religion on the character, which will remain after rational criticism
has done its utmost against the evidences of religion, are well worth preserving, and
that what they lack in direct strength as compared with those of a firmer belief is more
than compensated by the greater truth and rectitude of the morality they sanction.</q>
See also Ullmann, Sinlessness of Jesus; Alexander, Christ and Christianity, 129-157;
Schaff, Person of Christ; Young, The Christ in History; George Dana Boardman, The
Problem of Jesus.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>4. The testimony of Christ to himself&mdash;as being a messenger from
God and as being one with God.</head>

<p>
Only one personage in history has claimed to teach absolute truth, to be
one with God, and to attest his divine mission by works such as only God
could perform.
</p>

<p>
A. This testimony cannot be accounted for upon the hypothesis that
Jesus was an intentional deceiver: for (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) the perfectly consistent holiness
of his life; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the unwavering confidence with which he challenged
investigation of his claims and staked all upon the result; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the vast
improbability of a lifelong lie in the avowed interests of truth; and (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>)
the impossibility that deception should have wrought such blessing to the
world,&mdash;all show that Jesus was no conscious impostor.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Fisher, Essays on the Supernat. Origin of Christianity, 515-538&mdash;Christ knew how vast
his claims were, yet he staked all upon them. Though others doubted, he never doubted
himself. Though persecuted unto death, he never ceased his consistent testimony.
Yet he lays claim to humility: <emph>Mat. 11:29&mdash;<q>I am meek and lowly in heart.</q></emph> How can we reconcile
with humility his constant self-assertion? We answer that Jesus' self-assertion was
absolutely essential to his mission, for he and the truth were one: he could not assert
the truth without asserting himself, and he could not assert himself without asserting
the truth. Since he was the truth, he needed to say so, for men's sake and for the
truth's sake, and he could be meek and lowly in heart in saying so. Humility is not
self-depreciation, but only the judging of ourselves according to God's perfect standard.
<q>Humility</q> is derived from <q><foreign rend='italic'>humus</foreign></q>. It is the coming down from airy and vain
self-exploitation to the solid ground, the hard-pan, of actual fact.
</p>

<p>
God requires of us only so much humility as is consistent with truth. The self-glorification
of the egotist is nauseating, because it indicates gross ignorance or misrepresentation
of self. But it is a duty to be self-asserting, just so far as we represent the
truth and righteousness of God. There is a noble self-assertion which is perfectly consistent
with humility. Job must stand for his integrity. Paul's humility was not of
the Uriah Heep variety. When occasion required, he could assert his manhood and
his rights, as at Philippi and at the Castle of Antonia. So the Christian should frankly
say out the truth that is in him. Each Christian has an experience of his own, and
should tell it to others. In testifying to the truth he is only following the example of
<emph><q>Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed the good confession</q> (1 Tim. 6:13)</emph>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Nor can Jesus' testimony to himself be explained upon the hypothesis
that he was self-deceived: for this would argue (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) a weakness and
folly amounting to positive insanity. But his whole character and life
exhibit a calmness, dignity, equipoise, insight, self-mastery, utterly inconsistent
with such a theory. Or it would argue (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) a self-ignorance and self-exaggeration
which could spring only from the deepest moral perversion.
But the absolute purity of his conscience, the humility of his spirit, the
self-denying beneficence of his life, show this hypothesis to be incredible.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Rogers, Superhuman Origin of the Bible, 39&mdash;If he were man, then to demand that all
the world should bow down to him would be worthy of scorn like that which we feel
for some straw-crowned monarch of Bedlam. Forrest, The Christ of History and of
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
Experience, 22, 76&mdash;Christ never united with his disciples in prayer. He went up into
the mountain to pray, but not to pray <emph>with them</emph>: <emph>Luke 9:18&mdash;<q rend='pre'>as he was</q></emph> alone <emph><q rend='post'>praying, his disciples
were with him.</q></emph> The consciousness of preëxistence is the indispensable precondition
of the total demand which he makes in the Synoptics. Adamson, The Mind in Christ,
81, 82&mdash;We value the testimony of Christians to their communion with God. Much more
should we value the testimony of Christ. Only one who, first being divine, also knew
that he was divine, could reveal heavenly things with the clearness and certainty that
belong to the utterances of Jesus. In him we have something very different from the
momentary flashes of insight which leave us in all the greater darkness.
</p>

<p>
Nash, Ethics and Revelation, 5&mdash;<q>Self-respect is bottomed upon the ability to become
what one desires to be; and, if the ability steadily falls short of the task, the springs
of self-respect dry up; the motives of happy and heroic action wither. Science, art,
generous civic life, and especially religion, come to man's rescue,</q>&mdash;showing him his
true greatness and breadth of being in God. The State is the individual's larger self.
Humanity, and even the universe, are parts of him. It is the duty of man to enable
all men to be men. It is possible for men not only truthfully but also rationally to
assert themselves, even in earthly affairs. Chatham to the Duke of Devonshire: <q>My
Lord, I believe I can save this country, and that no one else can.</q> Leonardo da Vinci,
in his thirtieth year, to the Duke of Milan: <q>I can carry through every kind of work
in sculpture, in clay, marble, and bronze; also in painting I can execute everything
that can be demanded, as well as any one whosoever.</q>
</p>

<p>
Horace: <q>Exegi monumentum ære perennius.</q> Savage, Life beyond Death, 209&mdash;A
famous old minister said once, when a young and zealous enthusiast tried to get him
to talk, and failing, burst out with, <q>Have you no religion at all?</q> <q>None <emph>to speak of</emph>,</q>
was the reply. When Jesus perceived a tendency in his disciples to self-glorification,
he urged silence; but when he saw the tendency to introspection and inertness, he
bade them proclaim what he had done for them (<emph>Mat. 8:4</emph>; <emph>Mark 5:19</emph>). It is never right for
the Christian to proclaim himself; but, if Christ had not proclaimed himself, the world
could never have been saved. Rush Rhees. Life of Jesus of Nazareth, 235-237&mdash;<q>In
the teaching of Jesus, two topics have the leading place&mdash;the Kingdom of God, and
himself. He sought to be Lord, rather than Teacher only. Yet the Kingdom is not
one of power, national and external, but one of fatherly love and of mutual brotherhood.</q>
</p>

<p>
Did Jesus do anything for effect, or as a mere example? Not so. His baptism had
meaning for him as a consecration of himself to death for the sins of the world, and
his washing of the disciples' feet was the fit beginning of the paschal supper and the
symbol of his laying aside his heavenly glory to purify us for the marriage supper of the
Lamb. Thomas à Kempis: <q>Thou art none the holier because thou art praised, and
none the worse because thou art censured. What thou art, that thou art, and it avails
thee naught to be called any better than thou art in the sight of God.</q> Jesus' consciousness
of his absolute sinlessness and of his perfect communion with God is the
strongest of testimonies to his divine nature and mission. See Theological Eclectic, 4:137;
Liddon, Our Lord's Divinity, 153; J. S. Mill, Essays on Religion, 253; Young, Christ
of History; Divinity of Jesus Christ, by Andover Professors, 37-62.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
If Jesus, then, cannot be charged with either mental or moral unsoundness,
his testimony must be true, and he himself must be one with God and
the revealer of God to men.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Neither Confucius nor Buddha claimed to be divine, or the organs of divine revelation,
though both were moral teachers and reformers. Zoroaster and Pythagoras
apparently believed themselves charged with a divine mission, though their earliest
biographers wrote centuries after their death. Socrates claimed nothing for himself
which was beyond the power of others. Mohammed believed his extraordinary states
of body and soul to be due to the action of celestial beings; he gave forth the Koran
as <q>a warning to all creatures,</q> and sent a summons to the King of Persia and the
Emperor of Constantinople, as well as to other potentates, to accept the religion of
Islam; yet he mourned when he died that he could not have opportunity to correct
the mistakes of the Koran and of his own life. For Confucius or Buddha, Zoroaster
or Pythagoras, Socrates or Mohammed to claim all power in heaven and earth, would
show insanity or moral perversion. But this is precisely what Jesus claimed. He was
either mentally or morally unsound, or his testimony is true. See Baldensperger,
Selbstbewusstsein Jesu; E. Ballentine, Christ his own Witness.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. The Historical Results of the Propagation of Scripture
Doctrine.</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>The rapid progress of the gospel in the first centuries of our era
shows its divine origin.</hi>
</p>

<p>
A. That Paganism should have been in three centuries supplanted by
Christianity, is an acknowledged wonder of history.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The conversion of the Roman Empire to Christianity was the most astonishing revolution
of faith and worship ever known. Fifty years after the death of Christ, there
were churches in all the principal cities of the Roman Empire. Nero (37-68) found (as
Tacitus declares) an <q>ingens multitudo</q> of Christians to persecute. Pliny writes to
Trajan (52-117) that they <q>pervaded not merely the cities but the villages and country
places, so that the temples were nearly deserted.</q> Tertullian (160-230) writes: <q>We are
but of yesterday, and yet we have filled all your places, your cities, your islands, your
castles, your towns, your council-houses, even your camps, your tribes, your senate,
your forum. We have left you nothing but your temples.</q> In the time of the emperor
Valerian (253-268), the Christians constituted half the population of Rome. The conversion
of the emperor Constantine (272-337) brought the whole empire, only 300 years
after Jesus' death, under the acknowledged sway of the gospel. See McIlvaine and
Alexander, Evidences of Christianity.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The wonder is the greater when we consider the obstacles to the
progress of Christianity:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The scepticism of the cultivated classes; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the prejudice and
hatred of the common people; and (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the persecutions set on foot by
government.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Missionaries even now find it difficult to get a hearing among the cultivated
classes of the heathen. But the gospel appeared in the most enlightened age of
antiquity&mdash;the Augustan age of literature and historical inquiry. Tacitus called the
religion of Christ <q>exitiabilis superstitio</q>&mdash;<q>quos per flagitia invisos vulgus Christianos
appellabat.</q> Pliny: <q>Nihil aliud inveni quam superstitionem pravam et immodicam.</q>
If the gospel had been false, its preachers would not have ventured into the
centres of civilization and refinement; or if they had, they would have been detected.
(<hi rend='italic'>b)</hi> Consider the interweaving of heathen religions with all the relations of life. Christians
often had to meet the furious zeal and blind rage of the mob,&mdash;as at Lystra and
Ephesus. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Rawlinson, in his Historical Evidences, claims that the Catacombs of
Rome comprised nine hundred miles of streets and seven millions of graves within a
period of four hundred years&mdash;a far greater number than could have died a natural
death&mdash;and that vast multitudes of these must have been massacred for their faith.
The Encyclopædia Britannica, however, calls the estimate of De Marchi, which Rawlinson
appears to have taken as authority, a great exaggeration. Instead of nine hundred
miles of streets, Northcote has three hundred fifty. The number of interments to
correspond would be less than three millions. The Catacombs began to be deserted by
the time of Jerome. The times when they were universally used by Christians could
have been hardly more than two hundred years. They did not begin in sand-pits.
There were three sorts of tufa: (1) rocky, used for quarrying and too hard for Christian
purposes; (2) sandy, used for sand-pits, too soft to permit construction of galleries
and tombs; (3) granular, that used by Christians. The existence of the Catacombs
must have been well known to the heathen. After Pope Damasus the exaggerated
reverence for them began. They were decorated and improved. Hence many paintings
are of later date than 400, and testify to papal polity, not to that of early Christianity.
The bottles contain, not blood, but wine of the eucharist celebrated at
the funeral.
</p>

<p>
Fisher, Nature and Method of Revelation, 256-258, calls attention to Matthew Arnold's
description of the needs of the heathen world, yet his blindness to the true remedy:
<q>On that hard pagan world disgust And secret loathing fell; Deep weariness and sated
lust Made human life a hell. In his cool hall, with haggard eyes, The Roman noble
lay; He drove abroad, in furious guise, Along the Appian Way; He made a feast,
drank fierce and fast, And crowned his hair with flowers,&mdash;No easier nor no quicker
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
passed The impracticable hours.</q> Yet with mingled pride and sadness, Mr. Arnold fastidiously
rejects more heavenly nutriment. Of Christ he says: <q>Now he is dead! Far
hence he lies, In the lorn Syrian town, And on his grave, with shining eyes, The Syrian
stars look down.</q> He sees that the millions <q>Have such need of joy, And joy whose
grounds are true, And joy that should all hearts employ As when the past was new!</q>
The want of the world is: <q>One mighty wave of thought and joy, Lifting mankind
amain.</q> But the poet sees no ground of hope: <q>Fools! that so often here, Happiness
mocked our prayer, I think might make us fear A like event elsewhere,&mdash;Make us not
fly to dreams, But moderate desire.</q> He sings of the time when Christianity was young:
<q>Oh, had I lived in that great day, How had its glory new Filled earth and heaven, and
caught away My ravished spirit too!</q> But desolation of spirit does not bring with it
any lowering of self-esteem, much less the humility which deplores the presence and
power of evil in the soul, and sighs for deliverance. <emph><q>They that are whole have no need of a
physician, but they that are sick</q> (Mat. 9:12)</emph>. Rejecting Christ, Matthew Arnold embodies in
his verse <q>the sweetness, the gravity, the strength, the beauty, and the languor of
death</q> (Hutton, Essays, 302).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. The wonder becomes yet greater when we consider the natural insufficiency
of the means used to secure this progress.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The proclaimers of the gospel were in general unlearned men, belonging
to a despised nation. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The gospel which they proclaimed was a
gospel of salvation through faith in a Jew who had been put to an ignominious
death. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) This gospel was one which excited natural repugnance,
by humbling men's pride, striking at the root of their sins, and demanding
a life of labor and self-sacrifice. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The gospel, moreover, was an exclusive
one, suffering no rival and declaring itself to be the universal and only
religion.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The early Christians were more unlikely to make converts than modern Jews are
to make proselytes, in vast numbers, in the principal cities of Europe and America.
Celsus called Christianity <q>a religion of the rabble.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The cross was the Roman
gallows&mdash;the punishment of slaves. Cicero calls it <q>servitutis extremum summumque
supplicium.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) There were many bad religions: why should the mild Roman Empire
have persecuted the only good one? The answer is in part: Persecution did not originate
with the official classes; it proceeded really from the people at large. Tacitus
called Christians <q>haters of the human race.</q> Men recognized in Christianity a foe to
all their previous motives, ideals, and aims. Altruism would break up the old society,
for every effort that centered in self or in the present life was stigmatized by the gospel
as unworthy. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Heathenism, being without creed or principle, did not care to
propagate itself. <q>A man must be very weak,</q> said Celsus, <q>to imagine that Greeks
and barbarians, in Asia, Europe, and Libya, can ever unite under the same system of
religion.</q> So the Roman government would allow no religion which did not participate
in the worship of the State. <q>Keep yourselves from idols,</q> <q>We worship no
other God,</q> was the Christian's answer. Gibbon, Hist. Decline and Fall, 1: chap. 15,
mentions as secondary causes: (1) the zeal of the Jews; (2) the doctrine of immortality;
(3) miraculous powers; (4) virtues of early Christians; (5) privilege of participation
in church government. But these causes were only secondary, and all would
have been insufficient without an invincible persuasion of the truth of Christianity.
For answer to Gibbon, see Perrone, Prelectiones Theologicæ, 1:133.
</p>

<p>
Persecution destroys falsehood by leading its advocates to investigate the grounds
of their belief; but it strengthens and multiplies truth by leading its advocates to see
more clearly the foundations of their faith. There have been many conscientious persecutors:
<emph>John 16:2&mdash;<q>They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the hour cometh, that whosoever killeth
you shall think that he offereth service unto God.</q></emph> The Decretal of Pope Urban II reads: <q>For we
do not count them to be homicides, to whom it may have happened, through their burning
zeal against the excommunicated, to put any of them to death.</q> St. Louis, King
of France, urged his officers <q>not to argue with the infidel, but to subdue unbelievers
by thrusting the sword into them as far as it will go.</q> Of the use of the rack in
England on a certain occasion, it was said that it was used with all the tenderness which
the nature of the instrument would allow. This reminds us of Isaak Walton's instruction
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
as to the use of the frog: <q>Put the hook through his mouth and out at his gills;
and, in so doing, use him as though you loved him.</q>
</p>

<p>
Robert Browning, in his Easter Day, 275-288, gives us what purports to be A Martyr's
Epitaph, inscribed upon a wall of the Catacombs, which furnishes a valuable contrast
to the sceptical and pessimistic strain of Matthew Arnold: <q>I was born sickly, poor
and mean, A slave: no misery could screen The holders of the pearl of price from
Cæsar's envy: therefore twice I fought with beasts, and three times saw My children
suffer by his law; At length my own release was earned: I was some time in being
burned, But at the close a Hand came through The fire above my head, and drew My
soul to Christ, whom now I see. Sergius, a brother, writes for me This testimony on
the wall&mdash;For me, I have forgot it all.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The progress of a religion so unprepossessing and uncompromising to
outward acceptance and dominion, within the space of three hundred years,
cannot be explained without supposing that divine power attended its promulgation,
and therefore that the gospel is a revelation from God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Stanley, Life and Letters, 1:527&mdash;<q>In the Kremlin Cathedral, whenever the Metropolitan
advanced from the altar to give his blessing, there was always thrown under
his feet a carpet embroidered with the eagle of old Pagan Rome, to indicate that the
Christian Church and Empire of Constantinople had succeeded and triumphed over it.</q>
On this whole section, see F. W. Farrar, Witness of History to Christ, 91; McIlvaine,
Wisdom of Holy Scripture, 139.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>The beneficent influence of the Scripture doctrines and precepts,
wherever they have had sway, shows their divine origin.</hi> Notice:
</p>

<p>
A. Their influence on civilization in general, securing a recognition of
principles which heathenism ignored, such as Garbett mentions: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) the
importance of the individual; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the law of mutual love; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the sacredness
of human life; (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) the doctrine of internal holiness; (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) the sanctity
of home; (<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) monogamy, and the religious equality of the sexes; (<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) identification
of belief and practice.
</p>

<p>
The continued corruption of heathen lands shows that this change is not
due to any laws of merely natural progress. The confessions of ancient
writers show that it is not due to philosophy. Its only explanation is that
the gospel is the power of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Garbett, Dogmatic Faith, 177-186; F. W. Farrar, Witness of History to Christ, chap.
on Christianity and the Individual; Brace, Gesta Christi, preface, vi&mdash;<q>Practices and
principles implanted, stimulated or supported by Christianity, such as regard for the
personality of the weakest and poorest; respect for woman; duty of each member of
the fortunate classes to raise up the unfortunate; humanity to the child, the prisoner,
the stranger, the needy, and even to the brute; unceasing opposition to all forms of
cruelty, oppression and slavery; the duty of personal purity, and the sacredness of
marriage; the necessity of temperance; obligation of a more equitable division of the
profits of labor, and of greater coöperation between employers and employed; the right
of every human being to have the utmost opportunity of developing his faculties, and
of all persons to enjoy equal political and social privileges; the principle that the injury
of one nation is the injury of all, and the expediency and duty of unrestricted trade
and intercourse between all countries; and finally, a profound opposition to war, a
determination to limit its evils when existing, and to prevent its arising by means of
international arbitration.</q>
</p>

<p>
Max Müller: <q>The concept of humanity is the gift of Christ.</q> Guizot, History of
Civilization, 1: Introd., tells us that in ancient times the individual existed for the sake
of the State; in modern times the State exists for the sake of the individual. <q>The
individual is a discovery of Christ.</q> On the relations between Christianity and Political
Economy, see A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion, pages 443-460; on the cause of
the changed view with regard to the relation of the individual to the State, see page
207&mdash;<q>What has wrought the change? Nothing but the death of the Son of God. When
it was seen that the smallest child and the lowest slave had a soul of such worth
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
that Christ left his throne and gave up his life to save it, the world's estimate of
values changed, and modern history began.</q> Lucian, the Greek satirist and humorist,
160 A. D., said of the Christians: <q>Their first legislator [Jesus] has put it into their
heads that they are all brothers.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is this spirit of common brotherhood which has led in most countries to the abolition
of cannibalism, infanticide, widow-burning, and slavery. Prince Bismarck: <q>For
social well-being I ask nothing more than Christianity without phrases</q>&mdash;which
means the religion of the deed rather than of the creed. Yet it is only faith in the historic
revelation of God in Christ which has made Christian deeds possible. Shaler,
Interpretation of Nature, 232-278&mdash;Aristotle, if he could look over society to-day, would
think modern man a new species, in his going out in sympathy to distant peoples.
This cannot be the result of natural selection, for self-sacrifice is not profitable to the
individual. Altruistic emotions owe their existence to God. Worship of God has
flowed back upon man's emotions and has made them more sympathetic. Self-consciousness
and sympathy, coming into conflict with brute emotions, originate the sense
of sin. Then begins the war of the natural and the spiritual. Love of nature and
absorption in others is the true <foreign lang='sa' rend='italic'>Nirvana</foreign>. Not physical science, but the humanities, are
most needed in education.
</p>

<p>
H. E. Hersey, Introd. to Browning's Christmas Eve, 19&mdash; <q>Sidney Lanier tells us that
the last twenty centuries have spent their best power upon the development of personality.
Literature, education, government, and religion, have learned to recognize
the individual as the unit of force. Browning goes a step further. He declares that
so powerful is a complete personality that its very touch gives life and courage and
potency. He turns to history for the inspiration of enduring virtue and the stimulus
for sustained effort, and he finds both in Jesus Christ.</q> J. P. Cooke, Credentials of
Science, 43&mdash;The change from the ancient philosopher to the modern investigator is the
change from self-assertion to self-devotion, and the great revolution can be traced to
the influence of Christianity and to the spirit of humility exhibited and inculcated by
Christ. Lewes, Hist. Philos., 1:408&mdash;Greek morality never embraced any conception
of humanity; no Greek ever attained to the sublimity of such a point of view.
</p>

<p>
Kidd, Social Evolution, 165, 287&mdash;It is not intellect that has pushed forward the world
of modern times: it is the altruistic feeling that originated in the cross and sacrifice
of Christ. The French Revolution was made possible by the fact that humanitarian
ideas had undermined the upper classes themselves, and effective resistance was impossible.
Socialism would abolish the struggle for existence on the part of individuals.
What security would be left for social progress? Removing all restrictions upon population
ensures progressive deterioration. A non-socialist community would outstrip
a socialist community where all the main wants of life were secure. The real tendency
of society is to bring all the people into <emph>rivalry</emph>, not only on a footing of political equality,
but on conditions of equal social opportunities. The State in future will interfere and
control, in order to preserve or secure free competition, rather than to suspend it. The
goal is not socialism or State management, but competition in which all shall have
equal advantages. The evolution of human society is not primarily intellectual but
religious. The winning races are the religious races. The Greeks had more intellect,
but we have more civilization and progress. The Athenians were as far above us as we
are above the negro race. Gladstone said that we are intellectually weaker than the
men of the middle ages. When the intellectual development of any section of the race
has for the time being outrun its ethical development, natural selection has apparently
weeded it out, like any other unsuitable product. Evolution is developing <emph>reverence</emph>,
with its allied qualities, mental energy, resolution, enterprise, prolonged and
concentrated application, simple minded and single minded devotion to duty. Only
religion can overpower selfishness and individualism and ensure social progress.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Their influence upon individual character and happiness, wherever
they have been tested in practice. This influence is seen (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) in the moral
transformations they have wrought&mdash;as in the case of Paul the apostle, and
of persons in every Christian community; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) in the self-denying labors
for human welfare to which they have led&mdash;as in the case of Wilberforce and
Judson; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) in the hopes they have inspired in times of sorrow and death.
</p>

<p>
These beneficent fruits cannot have their source in merely natural causes,
apart from the truth and divinity of the Scriptures; for in that case the
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
contrary beliefs would be accompanied by the same blessings. But since
we find these blessings only in connection with Christian teaching, we may
justly consider this as their cause. This teaching, then, must be true, and
the Scriptures must be a divine revelation. Else God has made a lie to be
the greatest blessing to the race.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The first Moravian missionaries to the West Indies walked six hundred miles to take
ship, worked their passage, and then sold themselves as slaves, in order to get the privilege
of preaching to the negroes.... The father of John G. Paton was a stocking-weaver.
The whole family, with the exception of the very small children, worked from
6 a. m. to 10 p. m., with one hour for dinner at noon and a half hour each for breakfast
and supper. Yet family prayer was regularly held twice a day. In these breathing-spells
for daily meals John G. Paton took part of his time to study the Latin Grammar,
that he might prepare himself for missionary work. When told by an uncle that,
if he went to the New Hebrides, the cannibals would eat him, he replied: <q>You yourself
will soon be dead and buried, and I had as lief be eaten by cannibals as by worms.</q>
The Aneityumese raised arrow-root for fifteen years and sold it to pay the £1200
required for printing the Bible in their own language. Universal church-attendance
and Bible-study make those South Sea Islands the most heavenly place on earth on
the Sabbath-day.
</p>

<p>
In 1839, twenty thousand negroes in Jamaica gathered to begin a life of freedom.
Into a coffin were put the handcuffs and shackles of slavery, relics of the whipping-post
and the scourge. As the clock struck twelve at night, a preacher cried with the
first stroke: <q>The monster is dying!</q> and so with every stroke until the last, when he
cried: <q>The monster is dead!</q> Then all rose from their knees and sang: <q>Praise God
from whom all blessings flow!</q>... <q>What do you do that for?</q> said the sick Chinaman
whom the medical missionary was tucking up in bed with a care which the patient
had never received since he was a baby. The missionary took the opportunity to tell
him of the love of Christ.... The aged Australian mother, when told that her two
daughters, missionaries in China, had both of them been murdered by a heathen mob,
only replied: <q>This decides me; I will go to China now myself, and try to teach those
poor creatures what the love of Jesus means.</q>... Dr. William Ashmore: <q>Let one
missionary die, and ten come to his funeral.</q> A shoemaker, teaching neglected boys
and girls while he worked at his cobbler's bench, gave the impulse to Thomas Guthrie's
life of faith.
</p>

<p>
We must judge religions not by their ideals, but by their performances. Omar Khayyam
and Mozoomdar give us beautiful thoughts, but the former is not Persia, nor is
the latter India. <q>When the microscopic search of scepticism, which has hunted the
heavens and sounded the seas to disprove the existence of a Creator, has turned its
attention to human society and has found on this planet a place ten miles square where
a decent man can live in decency, comfort, and security, supporting and educating his
children, unspoiled and unpolluted; a place where age is reverenced, infancy protected,
manhood respected, womanhood honored, and human life held in due regard&mdash;when
sceptics can find such a place ten miles square on this globe, where the gospel of Christ
has not gone and cleared the way and laid the foundations and made decency and security
possible, it will then be in order for the sceptical literati to move thither and to ventilate
their views. But so long as these very men are dependent upon the very religion
they discard for every privilege they enjoy, they may well hesitate before they rob the
Christian of his hope and humanity of its faith in that Savior who alone has given that
hope of eternal life which makes life tolerable and society possible, and robs death of its
terrors and the grave of its gloom.</q> On the beneficent influence of the gospel, see
Schmidt, Social Results of Early Christianity; D. J. Hill, The Social Influence of Christianity.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Inspiration Of The Scriptures.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Definition of Inspiration.</head>

<p>
Inspiration is that influence of the Spirit of God upon the minds of the
Scripture writers which made their writings the record of a progressive
divine revelation, sufficient, when taken together and interpreted by the
same Spirit who inspired them, to lead every honest inquirer to Christ and
to salvation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Notice the significance of each part of this definition: 1. Inspiration is an influence
of the Spirit of God. It is not a merely naturalistic phenomenon or psychological
vagary, but is rather the effect of the inworking of the personal divine Spirit. 2. Yet
inspiration is an influence upon the mind, and not upon the body. God secures his end
by awakening man's rational powers, and not by an external or mechanical communication.
3. The writings of inspired men are the record of a revelation. They are not
themselves the revelation. 4. The revelation and the record are both progressive.
Neither one is complete at the beginning. 5. The Scripture writings must be taken
together. Each part must be viewed in connection with what precedes and with what
follows. 6. The same Holy Spirit who made the original revelations must interpret to
us the record of them, if we are to come to the knowledge of the truth. 7. So used
and so interpreted, these writings are sufficient, both in quantity and in quality, for
their religious purpose. 8. That purpose is, not to furnish us with a model history or
with the facts of science, but to lead us to Christ and to salvation.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Inspiration is therefore to be defined, not by its method, but by its
result. It is a general term including all those kinds and degrees of the
Holy Spirit's influence which were brought to bear upon the minds of the
Scripture writers, in order to secure the putting into permanent and written
form of the truth best adapted to man's moral and religious needs.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Inspiration may often include revelation, or the direct communication
from God of truth to which man could not attain by his unaided
powers. It may include illumination, or the quickening of man's cognitive
powers to understand truth already revealed. Inspiration, however,
does not necessarily and always include either revelation or illumination.
It is simply the divine influence which secures a transmission of needed
truth to the future, and, according to the nature of the truth to be transmitted,
it may be only an inspiration of superintendence, or it may be also
and at the same time an inspiration of illumination or revelation.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It is not denied, but affirmed, that inspiration may qualify for oral
utterance of truth, or for wise leadership and daring deeds. Men may be
inspired to render external service to God's kingdom, as in the cases of
Bezalel and Samson; even though this service is rendered unwillingly or
unconsciously, as in the cases of Balaam and Cyrus. All human intelligence,
indeed, is due to the inbreathing of that same Spirit who created
man at the beginning. We are now concerned with inspiration, however,
only as it pertains to the authorship of Scripture.
</p>

<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Gen. 2:7&mdash;<q>And Jehovah God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of
life; and man became a living soul</q></emph>; <emph>Ex. 31:2, 3&mdash;<q>I have called by name Bezalel ... and I have filled him with
the Spirit of God ... in all manner of workmanship</q></emph>; <emph>Judges 13:24, 25&mdash;<q>called his name Samson: and the
child grew, and Jehovah blessed him. And the Spirit of Jehovah began to move him</q></emph>; <emph>Num. 23:5&mdash;<q>And Jehovah
put a word in Balaam's mouth, and said, Return unto Balak, and thus shalt thou speak</q></emph>; <emph>2 Chron. 36:22&mdash;<q>Jehovah
stirred up the spirit of Cyrus</q></emph>; <emph>Is. 44:28&mdash;<q>that saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd</q></emph>; <emph>45:5&mdash;<q>I will gird thee,
though thou hast not known me</q></emph>; <emph>Job 32:8&mdash;<q>there is a spirit in man, and the breath of the Almighty giveth them
understanding.</q></emph> These passages show the true meaning of 2 Tim. 3:16&mdash;<q>Every scripture inspired
of God.</q> The word θεόπνευστος is to be understood as alluding, not to the flute-player's
breathing into his instrument, but to God's original inbreathing of life. The flute is
passive, but man's soul is active. The flute gives out only what it receives, but the
inspired man under the divine influence is a conscious and free originator of thought
and expression. Although the inspiration of which we are to treat is simply the inspiration
of the Scripture writings, we can best understand this narrower use of the term
by remembering that all real knowledge has in it a divine element, and that we are
possessed of complete consciousness only as we live, move, and have our being in God.
Since Christ, the divine Logos or Reason, is <emph><q>the light which lighteth every man</q> (John 1:9)</emph>, a
special influence of <emph><q>the spirit of Christ which was in them</q> (1 Pet. 1:11)</emph> rationally accounts for
the fact that <emph><q>men spake from God, being moved by the Holy Spirit</q> (2 Pet. 1:21)</emph>.
</p>

<p>
It may help our understanding of terms above employed if we adduce instances of
</p>

<lg>
<l>(1) Inspiration without revelation, as in Luke or Acts, <emph>Luke 1:1-3</emph>;</l>
<l>(2) Inspiration including revelation, as in the Apocalypse, <emph>Rev. 1:1, 11</emph>;</l>
<l>(3) Inspiration without illumination, as in the prophets, <emph>1 Pet. 1:11</emph>;</l>
<l>(4) Inspiration including illumination, as in the case of Paul, <emph>1 Cor. 2:12</emph>;</l>
<l>(5) Revelation without inspiration, as in God's words from Sinai, <emph>Ex. 20:1, 22</emph>;</l>
<l>(6) Illumination without inspiration, as in modern preachers, <emph>Eph. 2:20</emph>.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Other definitions are those of Park: <q>Inspiration is such an influence over the
writers of the Bible that all their teachings which have a religious character are trustworthy</q>;
of Wilkinson: <q>Inspiration is help from God to keep the report of divine
revelation free from error. Help to whom? No matter to whom, so the result is
secured. The final result, viz.: the record or report of revelation, this must be free
from error. Inspiration may affect one or all of the agents employed</q>; of Hovey:
<q>Inspiration was an influence of the Spirit of God on those powers of men which are
concerned in the reception, retention and expression of religious truth&mdash;an influence
so pervading and powerful that the teaching of inspired men was according to the
mind of God. Their teaching did not in any instance embrace all truth in respect to
God, or man, or the way of life; but it comprised just so much of the truth on any particular
subject as could be received in faith by the inspired teacher and made useful to
those whom he addressed. In this sense the teaching of the original documents composing
our Bible may be pronounced free from error</q>; of G. B. Foster: <q>Revelation is
the action of God in the soul of his child, resulting in divine self-expression there:
Inspiration is the action of God in the soul of his child, resulting in apprehension and
appropriation of the divine expression. Revelation has logical but not chronological
priority</q>; of Horton, Inspiration and the Bible, 10-13&mdash;<q>We mean by Inspiration
exactly those qualities or characteristics which are the marks or notes of the Bible....
We call our Bible inspired; by which we mean that by reading and studying it we
find our way to God, we find his will for us, and we find how we can conform ourselves
to his will.</q>
</p>

<p>
Fairbairn, Christ in Modern Theology, 496, while nobly setting forth the naturalness
of revelation, has misconceived the relation of inspiration to revelation by giving
priority to the former: <q>The idea of a written revelation may be said to be logically
involved in the notion of a living God. Speech is natural to spirit; and if God is by
nature spirit, it will be to him a matter of nature to reveal himself. But if he speaks
to man, it will be through men; and those who hear best will be most possessed of
God. This possession is termed <q>inspiration.</q> God inspires, man reveals: revelation
is the mode or form&mdash;word, character, or institution&mdash;in which man embodies what
he has received. The terms, though not equivalent, are co-extensive, the one denoting
the process on its inner side, the other on its outer.</q> This statement, although approved
by Sanday, Inspiration, 124, 125, seems to us almost precisely to reverse the right meaning
of the words. We prefer the view of Evans, Bib. Scholarship and Inspiration, 54&mdash;<q>God
has first revealed himself, and then has inspired men to interpret, record and apply
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
this revelation. In redemption, inspiration is the formal factor, as revelation is the
material factor. The men are inspired, as Prof. Stowe said. The thoughts are inspired,
as Prof. Briggs said. The words are inspired, as Prof. Hodge said. The warp and woof
of the Bible is πνεῦμα: <emph><q>the words that I have spoken unto you are spirit</q> (John 6:63)</emph>. Its fringes
run off, as was inevitable, into the secular, the material, the psychic.</q> Phillips Brooks,
Life, 2:351&mdash;<q>If the true revelation of God is in Christ, the Bible is not properly a revelation,
but the history of a revelation. This is not only a fact but a necessity, for a
person cannot be revealed in a book, but must find revelation, if at all, in a person.
The centre and core of the Bible must therefore be the gospels, as the story of Jesus.</q>
</p>

<p>
Some, like Priestley, have held that the gospels are authentic but not inspired. We
therefore add to the proof of the genuineness and credibility of Scripture, the proof of
its inspiration. Chadwick, Old and New Unitarianism, 11&mdash;<q>Priestley's belief in supernatural
revelation was intense. He had an absolute distrust of reason as qualified to
furnish an adequate knowledge of religious things, and at the same time a perfect confidence
in reason as qualified to prove that negative and to determine the contents of the
revelation.</q> We might claim the historical truth of the gospels, even if we did not
call them inspired. Gore, in Lux Mundi, 341&mdash;<q>Christianity brings with it a doctrine
of the inspiration of the Holy Scriptures, but is not based upon it.</q> Warfield and
Hodge, Inspiration, 8&mdash;<q>While the inspiration of the Scriptures is true, and being true
is fundamental to the adequate interpretation of Scripture, it nevertheless is not, in
the first instance, a principle fundamental to the truth of the Christian religion.</q>
</p>

<p>
On the idea of Revelation, see Ladd, in Journ. Christ. Philos., Jan. 1883:156-178; on
Inspiration, <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, Apr. 1883:225-248. See Henderson on Inspiration (2nd ed.), 58, 205,
249, 303, 310. For other works on the general subject of Inspiration, see Lee, Bannerman,
Jamieson, Macnaught; Garbett, God's Word Written; Aids to Faith, essay on
Inspiration. Also, Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 1:205; Westcott, Introd. to Study of the
Gospels, 27-65; Bib. Sac., 1:97; 4:154; 12:217; 15:29, 314; 25:192-198; Dr. Barrows, in
Bib. Sac., 1867:593; 1872:428; Farrar, Science in Theology, 208; Hodge and Warfield, in
Presb. Rev., Apr. 1881:225-261; Manly, The Bible Doctrine of Inspiration; Watts,
Inspiration; Mead, Supernatural Revelation, 350; Whiton, Gloria Patri, 136; Hastings,
Bible Dict., 1:296-299; Sanday, Bampton Lectures on Inspiration.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Proof of Inspiration.</head>

<p>
1. Since we have shown that God has made a revelation of himself to
man, we may reasonably presume that he will not trust this revelation
wholly to human tradition and misrepresentation, but will also provide a
record of it essentially trustworthy and sufficient; in other words, that the
same Spirit who originally communicated the truth will preside over its
publication, so far as is needed to accomplish its religious purpose.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Since all natural intelligence, as we have seen, presupposes God's indwelling, and
since in Scripture the all-prevailing atmosphere, with its constant pressure and effort
to enter every cranny and corner of the world, is used as an illustration of the impulse
of God's omnipotent Spirit to vivify and energize every human soul (<emph>Gen. 2:7</emph>; <emph>Job 32:8</emph>),
we may infer that, but for sin, all men would be morally and spiritually inspired (<emph>Num.
11:29&mdash;<q>Would that all Jehovah's people were prophets, that Jehovah would put his Spirit upon them!</q></emph> <emph>Is. 59:2&mdash;<q>your
iniquities have separated between you and your God</q></emph>). We have also seen that God's method
of communicating his truth in matters of religion is presumably analogous to his
method of communicating secular truth, such as that of astronomy or history. There
is an original delivery to a single nation, and to single persons in that nation, that it may
through them be given to mankind. Sanday, Inspiration, 140&mdash;<q>There is a <emph><q>purpose of
God according to selection</q> (Rom. 9:11)</emph>; there is an <emph><q>election</q></emph> or <emph><q>selection of grace</q></emph>; and the object
of that selection was Israel and those who take their name from Israel's Messiah. If
a tower is built in ascending tiers, those who stand upon the lower tiers are yet raised
above the ground, and some may be raised higher than others, but the full and unimpeded
view is reserved for those who mount upward to the top. And that is the place
destined for us if we will take it.</q>
</p>

<p>
If we follow the analogy of God's working in other communications of knowledge,
we shall reasonably presume that he will preserve the record of his revelations in
written and accessible documents, handed down from those to whom these revelations
were first communicated, and we may expect that these documents will be kept sufficiently
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
correct and trustworthy to accomplish their religious purpose, namely, that
of furnishing to the honest inquirer a guide to Christ and to salvation. The physician
commits his prescriptions to writing; the Clerk of Congress records its proceedings;
the State Department of our government instructs our foreign ambassadors, not orally,
but by dispatches. There is yet greater need that revelation should be recorded, since
it is to be transmitted to distant ages; it contains long discourses; it embraces mysterious
doctrines. Jesus did not write himself; for he was the subject, not the mere
channel, of revelation. His unconcern about the apostles' immediately committing to
writing what they saw and heard is inexplicable, if he did not expect that inspiration
would assist them.
</p>

<p>
We come to the discussion of Inspiration with a presumption quite unlike that of
Kuenen and Wellhausen, who write in the interest of almost avowed naturalism.
Kuenen, in the opening sentences of his Religion of Israel, does indeed assert the rule
of God in the world. But Sanday, Inspiration, 117, says well that <q>Kuenen keeps this
idea very much in the background. He expended a whole volume of 593 large octavo
pages (Prophets and Prophecy in Israel, London, 1877) in proving that the prophets
were <emph>not</emph> moved to speak by God, but that their utterances were all their own.</q> The following
extract, says Sanday, indicates the position which Dr. Kuenen really held: <q>We
do not allow ourselves to be deprived of God's presence in history. In the fortunes
and development of nations, and not least clearly in those of Israel, we see Him, the
holy and all-wise Instructor of his human children. But the old <emph>contrasts</emph> must be altogether
set aside. So long as we derive a separate part of Israel's religious life directly
from God, and allow the supernatural or immediate revelation to intervene in even
one single point, so long also our view of the whole continues to be incorrect, and we
see ourselves here and there necessitated to do violence to the well-authenticated contents
of the historical documents. It is the supposition of a natural development alone
which accounts for all the phenomena</q> (Kuenen, Prophets and Prophecy in Israel, 585).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. Jesus, who has been proved to be not only a credible witness, but a
messenger from God, vouches for the inspiration of the Old Testament, by
quoting it with the formula: <q>It is written</q>; by declaring that <q>one jot
or one tittle</q> of it <q>shall in no wise pass away,</q> and that <q>the Scripture
cannot be broken.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Jesus quotes from four out of the five books of Moses, and from the Psalms, Isaiah,
Malachi, and Zechariah, with the formula, <q>it is written</q>; see <emph>Mat. 4:4, 6, 7</emph>; <emph>11:10</emph>; <emph>Mark 14:27</emph>;
<emph>Luke 4:4-12</emph>. This formula among the Jews indicated that the quotation was from a
sacred book and was divinely inspired. Jesus certainly regarded the Old Testament
with as much reverence as the Jews of his day. He declared that <emph><q>one jot or one tittle shall
in no wise pass away from the law</q> (Mat. 5:18)</emph>. He said that <emph><q>the scripture cannot be broken</q> (John 10:35)</emph> = <q>the
normative and judicial authority of the Scripture cannot be set aside; notice
here [in the singular, ἡ γραφή] the idea of the unity of Scripture</q> (Meyer). And
yet our Lord's use of O. T. Scripture was wholly free from the superstitious literalism
which prevailed among the Jews of his day. The phrases <emph><q>word of God</q> (John 10:35;
Mark 7:13)</emph>, <emph><q>wisdom of God</q> (Luke 11:49)</emph> and <emph><q>oracles of God</q> (Rom. 3:2)</emph> probably designate
the original revelations of God and not the record of these in Scripture; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>1 Sam. 9:27</emph>;
<emph>1 Chron. 17:3</emph>; <emph>Is. 40:8</emph>; <emph>Mat. 13:19</emph>; <emph>Luke 3:2</emph>; <emph>Acts 8:25</emph>. Jesus refuses assent to the O. T. law
respecting the Sabbath (<emph>Mark 2:27</emph> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), external defilements (<emph>Mark 7:15</emph>), divorce (<emph>Mark 10:2</emph>
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). He <emph><q>came not to destroy but to fulfil</q> (Mat. 5:17)</emph>; yet he fulfilled the law by bringing out
its inner spirit in his perfect life, rather than by formal and minute obedience to its
precepts; see Wendt, Teaching of Jesus, 2:5-35.
</p>

<p>
The apostles quote the O. T. as the utterance of God (<emph>Eph. 4:8</emph>&mdash;διὸ λέγει, <hi rend='italic'>sc.</hi> θεός).
Paul's insistence upon the form of even a single word, as in <emph>Gal. 3:16</emph>, and his use of the
O. T. for purposes of allegory, as in <emph>Gal 4:21-31</emph>, show that in his view the O. T. text was
sacred. Philo, Josephus and the Talmud, in their interpretations of the O. T., fall continually
into a <q>narrow and unhappy literalism.</q> <q>The N. T. does not indeed escape
Rabbinical methods, but even where these are most prominent they seem to affect the
form far more than the substance. And through the temporary and local form the
writer constantly penetrates to the very heart of the O. T. teaching;</q> see Sanday,
Bampton Lectures on Inspiration, 87; Henderson, Inspiration, 254.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
3. Jesus commissioned his apostles as teachers and gave them promises
of a supernatural aid of the Holy Spirit in their teaching, like the promises
made to the Old Testament prophets.
</p>

<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Mat. 28:19, 20&mdash;<q>Go ye ... teaching ... and lo, I am with you.</q></emph> Compare promises to Moses (<emph>Ex.
3:12</emph>), Jeremiah (<emph>Jer. 1:5-8</emph>), Ezekiel (<emph>Ezek. 2</emph> and <emph>3</emph>). See also <emph>Is. 44:3</emph> and <emph>Joel 2:28&mdash;<q>I will
pour my Spirit upon thy seed</q></emph>; <emph>Mat. 10:7&mdash;<q>as ye go, preach</q></emph>; <emph>19&mdash;<q>be not anxious how or what ye shall
speak</q></emph>; <emph>John 14:26&mdash;<q>the Holy Spirit ... shall teach you all things</q></emph>; <emph>15:26, 27&mdash;<q>the Spirit of truth ...
shall bear witness of me: and ye also bear witness</q></emph> = the Spirit shall witness in and through you;
<emph>16:13&mdash;<q>he shall guide you into all the truth</q></emph> = (1) limitation&mdash;all <emph>the</emph> truth of Christ, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, not
of philosophy or science, but of religion; (2) comprehension&mdash;<emph>all</emph> the truth within this
limited range, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, sufficiency of Scripture as rule of faith and practice (Hovey); <emph>17:8&mdash;<q>the
words which thou gavest me I have given unto them</q></emph>; <emph>Acts 1:4&mdash;<q>he charged them ... to wait for
the promise of the Father</q></emph>; <emph>John 20:22&mdash;<q>he breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Spirit.</q></emph>
Here was both promise and communication of the personal Holy Spirit. Compare <emph>Mat.
10:19, 20&mdash;<q>it shall be given you in that hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of
your Father that speaketh in you.</q></emph> See Henderson, Inspiration, 247, 248.
</p>

<p>
Jesus' testimony here is the testimony of God. In <emph>Deut. 18:18</emph>, it is said that God will
put his words into the mouth of the great Prophet. In <emph>John 12:49, 50</emph>, Jesus says: <emph><q>I spake
not from myself, but the Father that sent me, he hath given me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should
speak. And I know that his commandment is life eternal; the things therefore which I speak, even as the Father hath
said unto me, so I speak.</q></emph> <emph>John 17:7, 8&mdash;<q>all things whatsoever thou hast given me are from thee: for the words
which thou gavest me I have given unto them.</q></emph> <emph>John 8:40&mdash;<q>a man that hath told you the truth, which I heard
from God.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
4. The apostles claim to have received this promised Spirit, and under
his influence to speak with divine authority, putting their writings upon a
level with the Old Testament Scriptures. We have not only direct statements
that both the matter and the form of their teaching were supervised
by the Holy Spirit, but we have indirect evidence that this was the case in
the tone of authority which pervades their addresses and epistles.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Statements</hi>:&mdash;<emph>1 Cor. 2:10, 13&mdash;<q>unto us God revealed them through the Spirit.... Which things also we
speak, not in words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Spirit teacheth</q></emph>; <emph>11:23&mdash;<q>I received of the Lord
that which also I delivered unto you</q></emph>; <emph>12:8, 28</emph>&mdash;<emph>the λόγος σοφίας was apparently a gift peculiar to
the apostles</emph>; <emph>14:37, 38&mdash;<q>the things which I write unto you ... they are the commandment of the Lord</q></emph>;
<emph>Gal. 1:12&mdash;<q>neither did I receive it from man, nor was I taught it, but it came to me through revelation of Jesus
Christ</q></emph>; <emph>1 Thess. 4:2, 8&mdash;<q>ye know what charge we gave you through the Lord Jesus.... Therefore he that rejecteth,
rejecteth not man, but God, who giveth his Holy Spirit unto you.</q></emph> The following passages put the
teaching of the apostles on the same level with O. T. Scripture: <emph>1 Pet. 1:11, 12&mdash;<q>Spirit of
Christ which was in them</q></emph> [O. T. prophets];&mdash;[N. T. preachers] <emph><q>preached the gospel unto you by the
Holy Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>2 Pet. 1:21</emph>&mdash;O. T. prophets <emph><q>spake from God, being moved by the Holy Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>3:2&mdash;<q>remember
the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets</q></emph> [O. T.], <emph><q>and the commandment of the Lord and
Savior through your apostles</q></emph> [N. T.]; 16&mdash;<emph><q rend='pre'>wrest</q></emph> [Paul's Epistles], <emph>as they do also the</emph> <emph>other scriptures</emph>,
<emph><q rend='post'>unto their own destruction.</q></emph> <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <emph>Ex. 4:14-16</emph>; <emph>7:1</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Implications</hi>:&mdash;<emph>2 Tim. 3:16&mdash;<q>Every scripture inspired of God is also profitable</q></emph>&mdash;a clear implication
of inspiration, though not a direct statement of it = <emph>there is a divinely inspired
Scripture</emph>. In <emph>1 Cor. 5:3-5</emph>, Paul, commanding the Corinthian church with regard to the
incestuous person, was arrogant if not inspired. There are more imperatives in the
Epistles than in any other writings of the same extent. Notice the continual asseveration
of authority, as in <emph>Gal. 1:1, 2</emph>, and the declaration that disbelief of the record is sin,
as in <emph>1 John 5:10, 11</emph>. <emph>Jude 3&mdash;<q rend='pre'>the faith which was once for all</q></emph> (ἅπαξ) <emph><q rend='post'>delivered unto the saints.</q></emph> See
Kahnis, Dogmatik, 3:122; Henderson, Inspiration (2nd ed.), 34, 234; Conant, Genesis,
Introd., xiii, note; Charteris, New Testament Scriptures: They claim truth, unity,
authority.
</p>

<p>
The passages quoted above show that inspired men distinguished inspiration from
their own unaided thinking. These inspired men claim that their inspiration is the
same with that of the prophets. <emph>Rev. 22:6&mdash;<q>the Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, sent his
angel to show unto his servants the things which must shortly come to pass</q></emph> = inspiration gave them supernatural
knowledge of the future. As inspiration in the O. T. was the work of the pre-incarnate
Christ, so inspiration in the N. T. is the work of the ascended and glorified
Christ by his Holy Spirit. On the Relative Authority of the Gospels, see Gerhardt,
in Am. Journ. Theol., Apl. 1899:275-294, who shows that not the words of Jesus in the
gospels are the final revelation, but rather the teaching of the risen and glorified
Christ in the Acts and the Epistles. The Epistles are the posthumous works of Christ.
Pattison, Making of the Sermon, 23&mdash;<q>The apostles, believing themselves to be inspired
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
teachers, often preached without texts; and the fact that their successors did not follow
their example shows that for themselves they made no such claim. Inspiration
ceased, and henceforth authority was found in the use of the words of the now complete
Scriptures.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
5. The apostolic writers of the New Testament, unlike professedly
inspired heathen sages and poets, gave attestation by miracles or prophecy
that they were inspired by God, and there is reason to believe that the
productions of those who were not apostles, such as Mark, Luke, Hebrews,
James, and Jude, were recommended to the churches as inspired, by apostolic
sanction and authority.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The twelve wrought miracles (<emph>Mat. 10:1</emph>). Paul's <emph><q>signs of an apostle</q> (2 Cor. 13:12)</emph> = miracles.
Internal evidence confirms the tradition that Mark was the <q>interpreter of
Peter,</q> and that Luke's gospel and the Acts had the sanction of Paul. Since the purpose
of the Spirit's bestowment was to qualify those who were to be the teachers and
founders of the new religion, it is only fair to assume that Christ's promise of the Spirit
was valid not simply to the twelve but to all who stood in their places, and to these not
simply as speakers, but, since in this respect they had a still greater need of divine
guidance, to them as writers also.
</p>

<p>
The epistle to the Hebrews, with the letters of James and Jude, appeared in the lifetime
of some of the twelve, and passed unchallenged; and the fact that they all, with
the possible exception of 2 Peter, were very early accepted by the churches founded
and watched over by the apostles, is sufficient evidence that the apostles regarded them
as inspired productions. As evidences that the writers regarded their writings as of
universal authority, see <emph>1 Cor. 1:2&mdash;<q>unto the church of God which is at Corinth ... with all that call
upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place,</q></emph> etc.; <emph>7:17&mdash;<q>so ordain I in all the churches</q></emph>; <emph>Col. 4:16&mdash;<q>And
when this epistle hath been read among you, cause that it be read also in the church of the Laodiceans</q></emph>; <emph>2 Pet.
3:15, 16&mdash;<q>our beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given to him, wrote unto you.</q></emph> See Bartlett,
in Princeton Rev., Jan. 1880:23-57; Bib. Sac., Jan. 1884:204, 205.
</p>

<p>
Johnson, Systematic Theology, 40&mdash;<q>Miraculous gifts were bestowed at Pentecost
on many besides apostles. Prophecy was not an uncommon gift during the apostolic
period.</q> There is no antecedent improbability that inspiration should extend to
others than to the principal leaders of the church, and since we have express instances
of such inspiration in oral utterances (<emph>Acts 11:28</emph>; <emph>21:9, 10</emph>) it seems natural that there
should have been instances of inspiration in written utterances also. In some cases
this appears to have been only an inspiration of superintendence. Clement of Alexandria
says only that Peter neither forbade nor encouraged Mark in his plan of writing
the gospel. Irenæus tells us that Mark's gospel was written after the death of
Peter. Papias says that Mark wrote down what he remembered to have heard from
Peter. Luke does not seem to have been aware of any miraculous aid in his writing,
and his methods appear to have been those of the ordinary historian.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
6. The chief proof of inspiration, however, must always be found in the
internal characteristics of the Scriptures themselves, as these are disclosed
to the sincere inquirer by the Holy Spirit. The testimony of the Holy
Spirit combines with the teaching of the Bible to convince the earnest
reader that this teaching is as a whole and in all essentials beyond the power
of man to communicate, and that it must therefore have been put into permanent
and written form by special inspiration of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Foster, Christian Life and Theology, 105&mdash;<q>The testimony of the Spirit is an argument
from identity of effects&mdash;the doctrines of experience and the doctrines of the
Bible&mdash;to identity of cause.... God-wrought experience proves a God-wrought
Bible.... This covers the Bible as a whole, if not the whole of the Bible. It is true
so far as I can test it. It is to be believed still further if there is no other evidence.</q>
Lyman Abbott, in his Theology of an Evolutionist, 105, calls the Bible <q>a record of
man's laboratory work in the spiritual realm, a history of the dawning of the consciousness
of God and of the divine life in the soul of man.</q> This seems to us unduly
subjective. We prefer to say that the Bible is also God's witness to us of his presence
and working in human hearts and in human history&mdash;a witness which proves its
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
divine origin by awakening in us experiences similar to those which it describes, and
which are beyond the power of man to originate.
</p>

<p>
G. P. Fisher, in Mag. of Christ. Lit., Dec. 1892:239&mdash;<q>Is the Bible infallible? Not in
the sense that all its statements extending even to minutiæ in matters of history and
science are strictly accurate. Not in the sense that every doctrinal and ethical statement
in all these books is incapable of amendment. The whole must sit in judgment
on the parts. Revelation is progressive. There is a human factor as well as a divine.
The treasure is in earthen vessels. But the Bible is infallible in the sense that whoever
surrenders himself in a docile spirit to its teaching will fall into no hurtful error in
matters of faith and charity. Best of all, he will find in it the secret of a new, holy and
blessed life, <emph><q>hidden with Christ in God</q> (Col. 3:3)</emph>. The Scriptures are the witness to Christ....
Through the Scriptures he is truly and adequately made known to us.</q> Denney,
Death of Christ, 314&mdash;<q>The unity of the Bible and its inspiration are correlative
terms. If we can discern a real unity in it&mdash;and I believe we can when we see that it
converges upon and culminates in a divine love bearing the sin of the world&mdash;then
that unity and its inspiration are one and the same thing. And it is not only inspired
as a whole, it is the only book that is inspired. It is the only book in the world to
which God sets his seal in our hearts when we read in search of an answer to the
question, How shall a sinful man be righteous with God?... The conclusion of our
study of Inspiration should be the conviction that the Bible gives us a body of doctrine&mdash;a
<emph><q>faith which was once for all delivered unto the saints</q> (Jude 3)</emph>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Theories of Inspiration.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. The Intuition-theory.</head>

<p>
This holds that inspiration is but a higher development of that natural
insight into truth which all men possess to some degree; a mode of intelligence
in matters of morals and religion which gives rise to sacred books, as
a corresponding mode of intelligence in matters of secular truth gives rise
to great works of philosophy or art. This mode of intelligence is regarded
as the product of man's own powers, either without special divine influence
or with only the inworking of an impersonal God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This theory naturally connects itself with Pelagian and rationalistic views of man's
independence of God, or with pantheistic conceptions of man as being himself the highest
manifestation of an all-pervading but unconscious intelligence. Morell and F. W.
Newman in England, and Theodore Parker in America, are representatives of this
theory. See Morell, Philos. of Religion, 127-179&mdash;<q>Inspiration is only a higher potency
of what every man possesses in some degree.</q> See also Francis W. Newman (brother
of John Henry Newman), Phases of Faith (= phases of unbelief); Theodore Parker,
Discourses of Religion, and Experiences as a Minister: <q>God is infinite; therefore he is
immanent in nature, yet transcending it; immanent in spirit, yet transcending that.
He must fill each point of spirit, as of space; matter must unconsciously obey; man,
conscious and free, has power to a certain extent to disobey, but obeying, the immanent
God acts in man as much as in nature</q>&mdash;quoted in Chadwick, Theodore Parker,
271. Hence Parker's view of Inspiration: If the conditions are fulfilled, inspiration
comes in proportion to man's gifts and to his use of those gifts. Chadwick himself, in
his Old and New Unitarianism, 68, says that <q>the Scriptures are inspired just so far as
they are inspiring, and no more.</q>
</p>

<p>
W. C. Gannett, Life of Ezra Stiles Gannett, 196&mdash;<q>Parker's spiritualism affirmed, as
the grand truth of religion, the immanence of an infinitely perfect God in matter and
mind, and his activity in both spheres.</q> Martineau, Study of Religion, 2:178-180&mdash;<q>Theodore
Parker treats the regular results of the human faculties as an immediate
working of God, and regards the Principia of Newton as inspired.... What then
becomes of the human personality? He calls God not only omnipresent, but omniactive.
Is then Shakespeare only by courtesy author of Macbeth?... If this were
more than rhetorical, it would be unconditional pantheism.</q> Both nature and man
are other names for God. Martineau is willing to grant that our intuitions and ideals
are expressions of the Deity in us, but our personal reasoning and striving, he thinks,
cannot be attributed to God. The word νοῦς has no plural: intellect, in whatever subject
manifested, being all one, just as a truth is one and the same, in however many
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
persons' consciousness it may present itself; see Martineau, Seat of Authority, 403.
Palmer, Studies in Theological Definition, 27&mdash;<q>We can draw no sharp distinction
between the human mind discovering truth, and the divine mind imparting revelation.</q>
Kuenen belongs to this school.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
With regard to this theory we remark:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Man has, indeed, a certain natural insight into truth, and we grant
that inspiration uses this, so far as it will go, and makes it an instrument in
discovering and recording facts of nature or history.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In the investigation, for example, of purely historical matters, such as Luke records,
merely natural insight may at times have been sufficient. When this was the case,
Luke may have been left to the exercise of his own faculties, inspiration only inciting
and supervising the work. George Harris, Moral Evolution, 413&mdash;<q>God could not
reveal himself <emph>to</emph> man, unless he first revealed himself <emph>in</emph> man. If it should be written
in letters on the sky: <q>God is good,</q>&mdash;the words would have no meaning, unless goodness
had been made known already in human volitions. Revelation is not by an occasional
stroke, but by a continuous process. It is not superimposed, but inherent....
Genius is inspired; for the mind which perceives truth must be responsive to the
Mind that made things the vehicles of thought.</q> Sanday, Bampton Lectures on Inspiration:
<q>In claiming for the Bible inspiration, we do not exclude the possibility of
other lower or more partial degrees of inspiration in other literatures. The Spirit of
God has doubtless touched other hearts and other minds ... in such a way as to give
insight into truth, besides those which could claim descent from Abraham.</q> Philo
thought the LXX translators, the Greek philosophers, and at times even himself, to be
inspired. Plato he regards as <q>most sacred</q> (ἱερωτατος), but all good men are in various
degrees inspired. Yet Philo never quotes as authoritative any but the Canonical
Books. He attributes to them an authority unique in its kind.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) In all matters of morals and religion, however, man's insight into
truth is vitiated by wrong affections, and, unless a supernatural wisdom can
guide him, he is certain to err himself, and to lead others into error.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>1 Cor. 2:14&mdash;<q>Now the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him;
and he cannot know them, because they are spiritually judged</q></emph>; <emph>10&mdash;<q>But unto us God revealed them through the
Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.</q></emph> See quotation from Coleridge, in
Shairp, Culture and Religion, 114&mdash;<q>Water cannot rise higher than its source; neither
can human reasoning</q>; Emerson, Prose Works, 1:474; 2:468&mdash;<q>'Tis curious we only
believe as deep as we live</q>; Ullmann, Sinlessness of Jesus, 183, 184. For this reason we
hold to a communication of religious truth, at least at times, more direct and objective
than is granted by George Adam Smith, Com. on Isaiah, 1:372&mdash;<q>To Isaiah inspiration
was nothing more nor less than the possession of certain strong moral and religious
convictions, which he felt he owed to the communication of the Spirit of God, and
according to which he interpreted, and even dared to foretell, the history of his people
and of the world. Our study completely dispels, on the evidence of the Bible itself,
that view of inspiration and prediction so long held in the church.</q> If this is meant as
a denial of any communication of truth other than the internal and subjective, we set
over against it. <emph>Num. 12:6-8&mdash;<q>if there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known unto
him in a vision, I will speak with him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so; he is faithful in all my house:
with him will I speak mouth to mouth, even manifestly, and not in dark speeches; and the form of Jehovah shall he
behold.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The theory in question, holding as it does that natural insight is
the only source of religious truth, involves a self-contradiction;&mdash;if the
theory be true, then one man is inspired to utter what a second is inspired
to pronounce false. The Vedas, the Koran and the Bible cannot be inspired
to contradict each other.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Vedas permit thieving, and the Koran teaches salvation by works; these cannot
be inspired and the Bible also. Paul cannot be inspired to write his epistles, and Swedenborg
also inspired to reject them. The Bible does not admit that pagan teachings
have the same divine endorsement with its own. Among the Spartans to steal was
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
praiseworthy; only to be caught stealing was criminal. On the religious consciousness
with regard to the personality of God, the divine goodness, the future life, the utility
of prayer, in all of which Miss Cobbe, Mr. Greg and Mr. Parker disagree with each
other, see Bruce, Apologetics, 143, 144. With Matheson we may grant that the leading
idea of inspiration is <q>the growth of the divine through the capacities of the human,</q>
while yet we deny that inspiration confines itself to this subjective enlightenment of
the human faculties, and also we exclude from the divine working all those perverse
and erroneous utterances which are the results of human sin.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) It makes moral and religious truth to be a purely subjective thing&mdash;a
matter of private opinion&mdash;having no objective reality independently
of men's opinions regarding it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
On this system truth is what men <q>trow</q>; things are what men <q>think</q>&mdash;words
representing only the subjective. <q>Better the Greek ἀλήθεια = <q>the unconcealed</q>
(objective truth)</q>&mdash;Harris, Philos. Basis of Theism, 182. If there be no absolute truth,
Lessing's <q>search for truth</q> is the only thing left to us. But who will search, if there
is no truth to be found? Even a wise cat will not eternally chase its own tail. The
exercise within certain limits is doubtless useful, but the cat gives it up so soon as
it becomes convinced that the tail cannot be caught. Sir Richard Burton became a
Roman Catholic, a Brahmin, and a Mohammedan, successively, apparently holding
with Hamlet that <q>there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so.</q>
This same scepticism as to the existence of objective truth appears in the sayings:
<q>Your religion is good for you, and mine for me</q>; <q>One man is born an Augustinian,
and another a Pelagian.</q> See Dix, Pantheism, Introd., 12. Richter: <q>It is not the
goal, but the course, that makes us happy.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) It logically involves the denial of a personal God who is truth and
reveals truth, and so makes man to be the highest intelligence in the universe.
This is to explain inspiration by denying its existence; since, if
there be no personal God, inspiration is but a figure of speech for a
purely natural fact.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>animus</foreign> of this theory is denial of the supernatural. Like the denial of miracles,
it can be maintained only upon grounds of atheism or pantheism. The view in question,
as Hutton in his Essays remarks, would permit us to say that the word of the Lord
came to Gibbon, amid the ruins of the Coliseum, saying: <q>Go, write the history of the
Decline and Fall!</q> But, replies Hutton: Such a view is pantheistic. Inspiration is
the voice of a living friend, in distinction from the voice of a dead friend, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, the influence
of his memory. The inward impulse of genius, Shakespeare's for example, is not
properly denominated inspiration. See Row, Bampton Lectures for 1877:428-474;
Rogers, Eclipse of Faith, 73 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> and 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Henderson, Inspiration (2nd ed.), 443-469,
481-490. The view of Martineau, Seat of Authority, 302, is substantially this. See criticism
of Martineau, by Rainy, in Critical Rev., 1:5-20.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. The Illumination Theory.</head>

<p>
This regards inspiration as merely an intensifying and elevating of the
religious perceptions of the Christian, the same in kind, though greater in
degree, with the illumination of every believer by the Holy Spirit. It
holds, not that the Bible is, but that it contains, the word of God, and that
not the writings, but only the writers, were inspired. The illumination
given by the Holy Spirit, however, puts the inspired writer only in full
possession of his normal powers, but does not communicate objective truth
beyond his ability to discover or understand.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This theory naturally connects itself with Arminian views of mere coöperation with
God. It differs from the Intuition-theory by containing several distinctively Christian
elements: (1) the influence of a personal God; (2) an extraordinary work of the Holy
Spirit; (3) the Christological character of the Scriptures, putting into form a revelation
of which Christ is the centre (<emph>Rev. 19:10</emph>). But while it grants that the Scripture
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
writers were <emph><q>moved by the Holy Spirit</q></emph> (φερόμενοι&mdash;<emph>2 Pet. 1:21</emph>), it ignores the complementary
fact that the Scripture itself is <emph><q>inspired of God</q></emph> (θεόπνευστος&mdash;<emph>2 Tim. 3:16</emph>). Luther's view
resembles this; see Dorner, Gesch. prot. Theol., 236, 237. Schleiermacher, with the
more orthodox Neander, Tholuck and Cremer, holds it; see Essays by Tholuck, in Herzog,
Encyclopädie, and in Noyes, Theological Essays; Cremer, Lexicon N.T., θεόπνευστος,
and in Herzog and Hauck, Realencyc., 9:183-203. In France, Sabatier, Philos. Religion,
90, remarks: <q>Prophetic inspiration is piety raised to the second power</q>&mdash;it
differs from the piety of common men only in intensity and energy. See also Godet,
in Revue Chrétienne, Jan. 1878.
</p>

<p>
In England Coleridge propounded this view in his Confessions of an Inquiring Spirit
(Works, 5:669)&mdash;<q>Whatever <emph>finds me</emph> bears witness that it has proceeded from a Holy
Spirit; in the Bible there is more that <emph>finds me</emph> than I have experienced in all other
books put together.</q> [Shall we then call Baxter's <q>Saints' Rest</q> inspired, while the
Books of Chronicles are not?] See also F. W. Robertson, Sermon I; Life and Letters,
letter 53, vol. 1:270; 2:143-150&mdash;<q>The <emph>other</emph> way, some twenty or thirty men in the
world's history have had special communication, miraculous and from God; in <emph>this</emph>
way, all may have it, and by devout and earnest cultivation of the mind and heart may
have it illimitably increased.</q> Frederick W. H. Myers, Catholic Thoughts on the Bible
and Theology, 10-20, emphasizes the idea that the Scriptures are, in their earlier parts,
not merely inadequate, but partially untrue, and subsequently superseded by fuller
revelations. The leading thought is that of <emph>accommodation</emph>; the record of revelation is
not necessarily infallible. Allen, Religious Progress, 44, quotes Bishop Thirlwall: <q>If
that Spirit by which every man spoke of old is a living and present Spirit, its later lessons
may well transcend its earlier</q>;&mdash;Pascal's <q>colossal man</q> is the race; the first
men represented only infancy; <emph>we</emph> are <q>the ancients</q>, and we are wiser than our fathers.
See also Farrar, Critical History of Free Thought, 473, note 50; Martineau, Studies in
Christianity: <q>One Gospel in Many Dialects.</q>
</p>

<p>
Of American writers who favor this view, see J. F. Clarke, Orthodoxy, its Truths and
Errors, 74; Curtis, Human Element in Inspiration; Whiton, in N. Eng., Jan. 1882:63-72;
Ladd, in Andover Review, July, 1885, in What is the Bible? and in Doctrine of
Sacred Scripture, 1:759&mdash;<q>a large proportion of its writings inspired</q>; 2:178, 275, 497&mdash;<q>that
fundamental misconception which identifies the Bible and the word of God</q>;
2:488&mdash;<q>Inspiration, as the subjective condition of Biblical revelation and the predicate
of the word of God, is <emph>specifically</emph> the same illumining, quickening, elevating and purifying
work of the Holy Spirit as that which goes on in the persons of the entire believing
community.</q> Professor Ladd therefore pares down all predictive prophecy, and
regards <emph>Isaiah 53</emph>, not as directly and solely, but only as typically, Messianic. Clarke,
Christian Theology, 35-44&mdash;<q>Inspiration is exaltation, quickening of ability, stimulation
of spiritual power; it is uplifting and enlargement of capacity for perception, comprehension
and utterance; and all under the influence of a thought, a truth, or an ideal
that has taken possession of the soul.... Inspiration to write was not different in
kind from the common influence of God upon his people.... Inequality in the Scriptures
is plain.... Even if we were convinced that some book would better have been
omitted from the Canon, our confidence in the Scriptures would not thereby be shaken.
The Canon did not make Scripture, but Scripture made the Canon. The inspiration of
the Bible does not prove its excellence, but its excellence proves its inspiration. The
Spirit brought the Scriptures to help Christ's work, but not to take his place. Scripture
says with Paul: <emph><q>Not that we have lordship over your faith, but are helpers of your joy: for in faith ye
stand fast</q> (2 Cor. 1:24)</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
E. G. Robinson: <q>The office of the Spirit in inspiration is not different from that
which he performed for Christians at the time the gospels were written.... When the
prophets say: <emph><q>Thus saith the Lord,</q></emph> they mean simply that they have divine authority for
what they utter.</q> Calvin E. Stowe, History of Books of Bible, 19&mdash;<q>It is not the
words of the Bible that were inspired. It is not the thoughts of the Bible that were
inspired. It was the men who wrote the Bible who were inspired.</q> Thayer, Changed
Attitude toward the Bible, 63&mdash;<q>It was not before the polemic spirit became rife in
the controversies which followed the Reformation that the fundamental distinction
between the word of God and the record of that word became obliterated, and the pestilent
tenet gained currency that the Bible is absolutely free from every error of every
sort.</q> Principal Cave, in Homiletical Review, Feb. 1892, admitting errors but none
serious in the Bible, proposes a mediating statement for the present controversy,
namely, that Revelation implies inerrancy, but that Inspiration does not. Whatever
God reveals must be true, but many have become inspired without being rendered
infallible. See also Mead, Supernatural Revelation, 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>

<p>
With regard to this theory we remark:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) There is unquestionably an illumination of the mind of every believer
by the Holy Spirit, and we grant that there may have been instances in
which the influence of the Spirit, in inspiration, amounted only to
illumination.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Certain applications and interpretations of Old Testament Scripture, as for example,
John the Baptist's application to Jesus of Isaiah's prophecy (<emph>John 1:29&mdash;<q rend='pre'>Behold, the Lamb of
God, that taketh away</q></emph> [marg. <emph><q>beareth</q></emph>] <emph><q rend='post'>the sin of the world</q></emph>), and Peter's interpretation of David's
words (<emph>Acts 2:27&mdash;<q>thou wilt not leave my soul unto Hades, Neither wilt thou give thy Holy One to see corruption</q></emph>),
may have required only the illuminating influence of the Holy Spirit. There is
a sense in which we may say that the Scriptures are inspired only to those who are
themselves inspired. The Holy Spirit must show us Christ before we recognize the
work of the Spirit in Scripture. The doctrines of atonement and of justification perhaps
did not need to be newly revealed to the N. T. writers; illumination as to earlier
revelations may have sufficed. But that Christ existed before his incarnation, and
that there are personal distinctions in the Godhead, probably required revelation.
Edison says that <q>inspiration is simply perspiration.</q> Genius has been defined as
<q>unlimited power to take pains.</q> But it is more&mdash;the power to do spontaneously and
without effort what the ordinary man does by the hardest. Every great genius recognizes
that this power is due to the inflowing into him of a Spirit greater than his own&mdash;the
Spirit of divine wisdom and energy. The Scripture writers attribute their
understanding of divine things to the Holy Spirit; see next paragraph. On genius, as
due to <q>subliminal uprush,</q> see F. W. H. Myers, Human Personality, 1:70-120.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) But we deny that this was the constant method of inspiration, or
that such an influence can account for the revelation of new truth to the
prophets and apostles. The illumination of the Holy Spirit gives no new
truth, but only a vivid apprehension of the truth already revealed. Any
original communication of truth must have required a work of the Spirit
different, not in degree, but in kind.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Scriptures clearly distinguish between revelation, or the communication of new
truth, and illumination, or the quickening of man's cognitive powers to perceive truth
already revealed. No increase in the power of the eye or the telescope will do more
than to bring into clear view what is already within its range. Illumination will not
lift the veil that hides what is beyond. Revelation, on the other hand, is an <q>unveiling</q>&mdash;the
raising of a curtain, or the bringing within our range of what was hidden
before. Such a special operation of God is described in <emph>2 Sam. 23:2, 3&mdash;<q>The Spirit of Jehovah
spake by me, And his word was upon my tongue. The God of Israel said, The Rock of Israel spake to me</q></emph>; <emph>Mat. 10:20&mdash;<q>For
it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaketh in you</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 2:9-13&mdash;<q>Things which
eye saw not, and ear heard not, And which entered not into the heart of man, Whatsoever things God prepared for
them that love him. But unto us God revealed them through the Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the
deep things of God. For who among men knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of the man, which is in him?
even so the things of God none knoweth, save the Spirit of God. But we received, not the spirit of the world, but the
spirit which is from God; that we might know the things that were freely given to us of God.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
Clairvoyance and second sight, of which along with many cases of imposition and
exaggeration there seems to be a small residuum of proved fact, show that there may
be extraordinary operations of our natural powers. But, as in the case of miracle, the
inspiration of Scripture necessitated an exaltation of these natural powers such as only
the special influence of the Holy Spirit can explain. That the product is inexplicable
as due to mere illumination seems plain when we remember that revelation sometimes
<emph>excluded</emph> illumination as to the meaning of that which was communicated, for the prophets
are represented in <emph>1 Pet. 1:11</emph> as <emph><q>searching what time or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ
which was in them did point unto, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glories that should follow
them.</q></emph> Since no degree of illumination can account for the prediction of <emph><q>things that
are to come</q></emph> (<emph>John 16:13</emph>), this theory tends to the denial of any immediate revelation in
prophecy so-called, and the denial easily extends to any immediate revelation of
doctrine.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Mere illumination could not secure the Scripture writers from
frequent and grievous error. The spiritual perception of the Christian
is always rendered to some extent imperfect and deceptive by remaining
depravity. The subjective element so predominates in this theory, that no
certainty remains even with regard to the trustworthiness of the Scriptures
as a whole.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
While we admit imperfections of detail in matters not essential to the moral and
religious teaching of Scripture, we claim that the Bible furnishes a sufficient guide to
Christ and to salvation. The theory we are considering, however, by making the
measure of holiness to be the measure of inspiration, renders even the collective testimony
of the Scripture writers an uncertain guide to truth. We point out therefore
that inspiration is not absolutely limited by the moral condition of those who are
inspired. Knowledge, in the Christian, may go beyond conduct. Balaam and Caiaphas
were not holy men, yet they were inspired (<emph>Num. 23:5; John 11:49-52</emph>). The promise of
Christ assured at least the essential trustworthiness of his witnesses (<emph>Mat. 10:7, 19, 20; John
14:26; 15:26, 27; 16:13; 17:8</emph>). This theory that inspiration is a wholly subjective communication
of truth leads to the practical rejection of important parts of Scripture, in
fact to the rejection of all Scripture that professes to convey truth beyond the power
of man to discover or to understand. Notice the progress from Thomas Arnold (Sermons,
2:185) to Matthew Arnold (Literature and Dogma, 134, 137). Notice also Swedenborg's
rejection of nearly one half the Bible (Ruth, Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther,
Job, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, and the whole of the N. T. except the
Gospels and the Apocalypse), connected with the claim of divine authority for his new
revelation. <q>His interlocutors all Swedenborgize</q> (R. W. Emerson). On Swedenborg,
see Hours with the Mystics, 2:230; Moehler, Symbolism, 436-466; New Englander,
Jan. 1874:195; Baptist Review, 1883:143-157; Pond, Swedenborgianism; Ireland, The
Blot on the Brain, 1-129.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The theory is logically indefensible, as intimating that illumination
with regard to truth can be imparted without imparting truth itself,
whereas God must first furnish objective truth to be perceived before he
can illuminate the mind to perceive the meaning of that truth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The theory is analogous to the views that preservation is a continued creation;
knowledge is recognition; regeneration is increase of light. In order to preservation,
something must first be created which can be preserved; in order to recognition,
something must be known which can be recognized or known again; in order to make
increase of light of any use, there must first be the power to see. In like manner, inspiration
cannot be mere illumination, because the external necessarily precedes the internal,
the objective precedes the subjective, the truth revealed precedes the apprehension
of that truth. In the case of all truth that surpasses the normal powers of man to
perceive or evolve, there must be special communication from God; revelation must
go before inspiration; inspiration alone is not revelation. It matters not whether this
communication of truth be from without or from within. As in creation, God can
work from within, yet the new result is not explicable as mere reproduction of the
past. The eye can see only as it receives and uses the external light furnished by the
sun, even though it be equally true that without the eye the light of the sun would be
nothing worth.
</p>

<p>
Pfleiderer, Grundriss, 17-19, says that to Schleiermacher revelation is the original
appearance of a proper religious life, which life is derived neither from external communication
nor from invention and reflection, but from a divine impartation, which
impartation can be regarded, not merely as an instructive influence upon man as an
intellectual being, but as an endowment determining his whole personal existence&mdash;an
endowment analogous to the higher conditions of poetic and heroic exaltation.
Pfleiderer himself would give the name <q>revelation</q> to <q>every original experience
in which man becomes aware of, and is seized by, supersensible truth, truth which does
not come from external impartation nor from purposed reflection, but from the unconscious
and undivided transcendental ground of the soul, and so is received as an
impartation from God through the medium of the soul's human activity.</q> Kaftan,
Dogmatik, 51 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>&mdash;<q>We must put the conception of revelation in place of inspiration.
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
Scripture is the record of divine revelation. We do not propose a new doctrine or
inspiration, in place of the old. We need only revelation, and, here and there, providence.
The testimony of the Holy Spirit is given, not to inspiration, but to revelation&mdash;the
truths that touch the human spirit and have been historically revealed.</q>
</p>

<p>
Allen, Jonathan Edwards, 182&mdash;Edwards held that spiritual life in the soul is given
by God only to his favorites and dear children, while inspiration may be thrown out,
as it were, to dogs and swine&mdash;a Balaam, Saul, and Judas. The greatest privilege of
apostles and prophets was, not their inspiration, but their holiness. Better to have
grace in the heart, than to be the mother of Christ (<emph>Luke 11:27, 28</emph>). Maltbie D. Babcock,
in S. S. Times, 1901:590&mdash;<q>The man who mourns because infallibility cannot be had in
a church, or a guide, or a set of standards, does not know when he is well off. How
could God develop our minds, our power of moral judgment, if there were no <q>spirit to
be tried</q> (<emph>1 John 4:1</emph>), no necessity for discrimination, no discipline of search and challenge
and choice? To give the right answer to a problem is to put him on the side of
infallibility so far as that answer is concerned, but it is to do him an ineffable wrong
touching his real education. The blessing of life's schooling is not in knowing the right
answer in advance, but in developing power through struggle.</q>
</p>

<p>
Why did John Henry Newman surrender to the Church of Rome? Because he
assumed that an external authority is absolutely essential to religion, and, when such
an assumption is followed, Rome is the only logical terminus. <q>Dogma was,</q> he says,
<q>the fundamental principle of my religion.</q> Modern ritualism is a return to this mediæval
notion. <q>Dogmatic Christianity,</q> says Harnack, <q>is Catholic. It needs an inerrant
Bible, and an infallible church to interpret that Bible. The dogmatic Protestant
is of the same camp with the sacramental and infallible Catholic.</q> Lyman Abbott:
<q>The new Reformation denies the infallibility of the Bible, as the Protestant Reformation
denied the infallibility of the Church. There is no infallible authority. Infallible
authority is undesirable.... God has given us something far better,&mdash;life.... The
Bible is the record of the gradual manifestation of God to man in human experience,
in moral laws and their applications, and in the life of Him who was God manifest in
the flesh.</q>
</p>

<p>
Leighton Williams: <q>There is no inspiration apart from experience. Baptists are
not sacramental, nor creedal, but experimental Christians</q>&mdash;not Romanists, nor Protestants,
but believers in an inner light. <q>Life, as it develops, awakens into self-consciousness.
That self-consciousness becomes the most reliable witness as to the nature
of the life of which it is the development. Within the limits of its own sphere, its authority
is supreme. Prophecy is the utterance of the soul in moments of deep religious
experience. The inspiration of Scripture writers is not a peculiar thing,&mdash;it was given
that the same inspiration might be perfected in those who read their writings.</q> Christ
is the only ultimate authority, and he reveals himself in three ways, through Scripture,
the Reason, and the Church. Only Life saves, and the Way leads through the Truth to
the Life. Baptists stand nearer to the Episcopal system of life than to the Presbyterian
system of creed. Whiton, Gloria Patri, 136&mdash;<q>The mistake is in looking to the Father
above the world, rather than to the Son and the Spirit within the world, as the immediate
source of revelation.... Revelation is the unfolding of the life and thought of
God within the world. One should not be troubled by finding errors in the Scriptures,
any more than by finding imperfections in any physical work of God, as in the human
eye.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. The Dictation-theory.</head>

<p>
This theory holds that inspiration consisted in such a possession of the
minds and bodies of the Scripture writers by the Holy Spirit, that they
became passive instruments or amanuenses&mdash;pens, not penmen, of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This theory naturally connects itself with that view of miracles which regards them
as suspensions or violations of natural law. Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 1:624 (transl. 2:186-189),
calls it a <q>docetic view of inspiration. It holds to the abolition of second
causes, and to the perfect passivity of the human instrument; denies any inspiration
of persons, and maintains inspiration of writings only. This exaggeration of the divine
element led to the hypothesis of a multiform divine sense in Scripture, and, in assigning
the spiritual meaning, a rationalizing spirit led the way.</q> Representatives of this
view are Quenstedt, Theol. Didact., 1:76&mdash;<q>The Holy Ghost inspired his amanuenses
with those expressions which they would have employed, had they been left to themselves</q>;
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
Hooker, Works, 2:383&mdash;<q>They neither spake nor wrote any word of their
own, but uttered syllable by syllable as the Spirit put it into their mouths</q>; Gaussen,
Theopneusty, 61&mdash;<q>The Bible is not a book which God charged men already enlightened
to make under his protection; it is a book which God dictated to them</q>; Cunningham,
Theol. Lectures, 349&mdash;<q>The verbal inspiration of the Scriptures [which he
advocates] implies in general that the words of Scripture were suggested or dictated
by the Holy Spirit, as well as the substance of the matter, and this, not only in some
portion of the Scriptures, but through the whole.</q> This reminds us of the old theory
that God created fossils in the rocks, as they would be had ancient seas existed.
</p>

<p>
Sanday, Bamp. Lect. on Inspiration, 74, quotes Philo as saying: <q>A prophet gives
forth nothing at all of his own, but acts as interpreter at the prompting of another in
all his utterances, and as long as he is under inspiration he is in ignorance, his reason
departing from its place and yielding up the citadel of the soul, when the divine Spirit
enters into it and dwells in it and strikes at the mechanism of the voice, sounding
through it to the clear declaration of that which he prophesieth</q>; in <emph>Gen. 15:12&mdash;<q>About
the setting of the sun a trance came upon Abram</q></emph>&mdash;the sun is the light of human reason which sets
and gives place to the Spirit of God. Sanday, 78, says also: <q>Josephus holds that even
historical narratives, such as those at the beginning of the Pentateuch which were not
written down by contemporary prophets, were obtained by direct inspiration from
God. The Jews from their birth regard their Scripture as <q>the decrees of God,</q> which
they strictly observe, and for which if need be they are ready to die.</q> The Rabbis said
that <q>Moses did not write one word out of his own knowledge.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Reformers held to a much freer view than this. Luther said: <q>What does not
carry Christ with it, is not apostolic, even though St. Peter or St. Paul taught it. If
our adversaries fall back on the Scripture against Christ, we fall back on Christ against
the Scripture.</q> Luther refused canonical authority to books not actually written by
apostles or composed, like Mark and Luke, under their direction. So he rejected from
the rank of canonical authority Hebrews, James, Jude, 2 Peter and Revelation. Even
Calvin doubted the Petrine authorship of 2 Peter, excluded the book of Revelation
from the Scripture on which he wrote Commentaries, and also thus ignored the second
and third epistles of John; see Prof. R. E. Thompson, in S. S. Times, Dec. 3, 1898:803,
804. The dictation-theory is post-Reformation. H. P. Smith, Bib. Scholarship and
Inspiration, 85&mdash;<q>After the Council of Trent, the Roman Catholic polemic became
sharper. It became the endeavor of that party to show the necessity of tradition and
the untrustworthiness of Scripture alone. This led the Protestants to defend the Bible
more tenaciously than before.</q> The Swiss Formula of Consensus in 1675 not only called
the Scriptures <q>the very word of God,</q> but declared the Hebrew vowel-points to be
inspired, and some theologians traced them back to Adam. John Owen held to the
inspiration of the vowel-points; see Horton, Inspiration and Bible, 8. Of the age which
produced the Protestant dogmatic theology, Charles Beard, in the Hibbert Lectures
for 1883, says: <q>I know no epoch of Christianity to which I could more confidently
point in illustration of the fact that where there is most theology, there is often least
religion.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Of this view we may remark:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) We grant that there are instances when God's communications were
uttered in an audible voice and took a definite form of words, and that this
was sometimes accompanied with the command to commit the words to
writing.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
For examples, see <emph>Ex. 3:4&mdash;<q>God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses</q></emph>; <emph>20:22&mdash;<q>Ye
yourselves have seen that I have talked with you from heaven</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Heb. 12:19&mdash;<q>the voice of words;
which voice they that heard entreated that no word more should be spoken unto them</q></emph>; <emph>Numbers 7:89&mdash;<q>And when
Moses went into the tent of meeting to speak with him, then he heard the Voice speaking unto him from above the
mercy-seat that was upon the ark of the testimony, from between the two cherubim: and he spake unto him</q></emph>; <emph>8:1&mdash;<q>And
Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying,</q></emph> etc.; <emph>Dan. 4:31&mdash;<q>While the word was in the king's mouth, there fell a
voice from heaven, saying, O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken: The kingdom is departed from thee</q></emph>; <emph>Acts 9:5&mdash;<q>And
he said, Who art thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest</q></emph>; <emph>Rev. 19:9&mdash;<q>And he
saith unto me, Write, Blessed are they that are bidden to the marriage supper of the Lamb</q></emph>; <emph>21:5&mdash;<q>And he that
sitteth on the throne said, Behold, I make all things new</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>1:10, 11&mdash;<q>and I heard behind me a great voice, as
of a trumpet saying, What thou seest, write in a book and send it to the seven churches.</q></emph> So the voice from
heaven at the baptism, and at the transfiguration, of Jesus (<emph>Mat. 3:17</emph>, and <emph>17:5</emph>; see
Broadus, Amer. Com., on these passages).
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The theory in question, however, rests upon a partial induction of
Scripture facts,&mdash;unwarrantably assuming that such occasional instances
of direct dictation reveal the invariable method of God's communications of
truth to the writers of the Bible.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Scripture nowhere declares that this immediate communication of the words was universal.
On <emph>1 Cor. 2:13&mdash;οὐκ ἐν διδακτοίς ανθρωπίνης σοφίας, λόγοις, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν διδακτοîς πνεύματος</emph>,
the text usually cited as proof of invariable dictation&mdash;Meyer says: <q>There is no dictation
here; διδακτοîς excludes everything mechanical.</q> Henderson, Inspiration (2nd
ed.), 333, 349&mdash;<q>As human wisdom did not dictate word for word, so the Spirit did not.</q>
Paul claims for Scripture simply a general style of plainness which is due to the influence
of the Spirit. Manly: <q>Dictation to an amanuensis is not <emph>teaching</emph>.</q> Our Revised
Version properly translates the remainder of the verse, <emph>1 Cor. 2:13&mdash;<q>combining spiritual things
with spiritual words.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It cannot account for the manifestly human element in the Scriptures.
There are peculiarities of style which distinguish the productions of
each writer from those of every other, and there are variations in accounts
of the same transaction which are inconsistent with the theory of a solely
divine authorship.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Notice Paul's anacoloutha and his bursts of grief and indignation (<emph>Rom. 5:12 </emph><hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <emph>2 Cor.
11:1</emph> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), and his ignorance of the precise number whom he had baptized (<emph>1 Cor. 1:16</emph>).
One beggar or two (<emph>Mat. 20:30</emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Luke 18:35</emph>); <emph><q>about five and twenty or thirty furlongs</q> (John 6:19)</emph>;
<emph><q>shed for many</q></emph> (<emph>Mat. 26:28</emph> has περί, <emph>Mark 14:24</emph> and <emph>Luke 22:20</emph> have ὑπέρ). Dictation of words
which were immediately to be lost by imperfect transcription? Clarke, Christian
Theology, 33-37&mdash;<q>We are under no obligation to maintain the complete inerrancy of
the Scriptures. In them we have the freedom of life, rather than extraordinary precision
of statement or accuracy of detail. We have become Christians in spite of differences
between the evangelists. The Scriptures are various, progressive, free.
There is no authority in Scripture for applying the word 'inspired' to our present
Bible as a whole, and theology is not bound to employ this word in defining the Scriptures.
Christianity is founded in history, and will stand whether the Scriptures are
inspired or not. If special inspiration were wholly disproved, Christ would still be the
Savior of the world. But the divine element in the Scriptures will never be disproved.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) It is inconsistent with a wise economy of means, to suppose that
the Scripture writers should have had dictated to them what they knew
already, or what they could inform themselves of by the use of their natural
powers.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Why employ eye-witnesses at all? Why not dictate the gospels to Gentiles living a
thousand years before? God respects the instruments he has called into being, and he
uses them according to their constitutional gifts. George Eliot represents Stradivarius
as saying:&mdash;<q>If my hand slacked, I should rob God&mdash;since he is fullest good&mdash;Leaving
a blank instead of violins. God cannot make Antonio Stradivari's violins,
Without Antonio.</q> <emph>Mark 11:3&mdash;<q>The Lord hath need of him,</q></emph> may apply to man as well as beast.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) It contradicts what we know of the law of God's working in the soul.
The higher and nobler God's communications, the more fully is man in
possession and use of his own faculties. We cannot suppose that this highest
work of man under the influence of the Spirit was purely mechanical.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Joseph receives communication by vision (<emph>Mat. 1:20</emph>); Mary, by words of an angel
spoken in her waking moments (<emph>Luke 1:28</emph>). The more advanced the recipient, the more
conscious the communication. These four theories might almost be called the Pelagian,
the Arminian, the Docetic, and the Dynamical. Sabatier, Philos. Religion, 41, 42, 87&mdash;<q>In
the Gospel of the Hebrews, the Father says at the baptism to Jesus: <q>My Son, in
all the prophets I was waiting for thee, that thou mightest come, and that I might rest
in thee. For thou art my Rest.</q> Inspiration becomes more and more internal, until in
Christ it is continuous and complete. Upon the opposite Docetic view, the most perfect
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
inspiration should have been that of Balaam's ass.</q> Semler represents the Pelagian
or Ebionitic view, as Quenstedt represents this Docetic view. Semler localizes and
temporalizes the contents of Scripture. Yet, though he carried this to the extreme of
excluding any divine authorship, he did good service in leading the way to the historical
study of the Bible.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>4. The Dynamical Theory.</head>

<p>
The true view holds, in opposition to the first of these theories, that
inspiration is not simply a natural but also a supernatural fact, and that it
is the immediate work of a personal God in the soul of man.
</p>

<p>
It holds, in opposition to the second, that inspiration belongs, not only
to the men who wrote the Scriptures, but to the Scriptures which they
wrote, so that these Scriptures, when taken together, constitute a trustworthy
and sufficient record of divine revelation.
</p>

<p>
It holds, in opposition to the third theory, that the Scriptures contain a
human as well as a divine element, so that while they present a body of
divinely revealed truth, this truth is shaped in human moulds and adapted
to ordinary human intelligence.
</p>

<p>
In short, inspiration is characteristically neither natural, partial, nor
mechanical, but supernatural, plenary, and dynamical. Further explanations
will be grouped under the head of The Union of the Divine and
Human Elements in Inspiration, in the section which immediately follows.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
If the small circle be taken as symbol of the human element in inspiration, and the
large circle as symbol of the divine, then the Intuition-theory would be represented by
the small circle alone; the Dictation-theory by the large circle alone; the Illumination-theory
by the small circle external to the large, and touching it at only a single point;
the Dynamical-theory by two concentric circles, the small included in the large. Even
when inspiration is but the exaltation and intensification of man's natural powers,
it must be considered the work of God as well as of man. God can work from within
as well as from without. As creation and regeneration are works of the immanent
rather than of the transcendent God, so inspiration is in general a work within man's
soul, rather than a communication to him from without. Prophecy may be natural to
perfect humanity. Revelation is an unveiling, and the Röntgen rays enable us to see
through a veil. But the insight of the Scripture writers into truth so far beyond their
mental and moral powers is inexplicable except by a supernatural influence upon their
minds; in other words, except as they were lifted up into the divine Reason and
endowed with the wisdom of God.
</p>

<p>
Although we propose this Dynamical-theory as one which best explains the Scripture
facts, we do not regard this or any other theory as of essential importance. No theory
of inspiration is necessary to Christian faith. Revelation precedes inspiration. There
was religion before the Old Testament, and an oral gospel before the New Testament.
God might reveal without recording; might permit record without inspiration; might
inspire without vouching for anything more than religious teaching and for the history,
only so far as was necessary to that religious teaching. Whatever theory of
inspiration we frame, should be the result of a strict induction of the Scripture facts,
and not an a priori scheme to which Scripture must be conformed. The fault of many
past discussions of the subject is the assumption that God must adopt some particular
method of inspiration, or secure an absolute perfection of detail in matters not essential
to the religious teaching of Scripture. Perhaps the best theory of inspiration is to
have no theory.
</p>

<p>
Warfield and Hodge, Inspiration, 8&mdash;<q>Very many religious and historical truths
must be established before we come to the question of inspiration, as for instance the
being and moral government of God, the fallen condition of man, the fact of a redemptive
scheme, the general historical truth of the Scriptures, and the validity and authority
of the revelation of God's will which they contain, i. e., the general truth of
Christianity and of its doctrines. Hence it follows that while the inspiration of the
Scriptures is true, and being true is a principle fundamental to the adequate interpretation
of Scripture, it nevertheless is not, in the first instance, a principle fundamental
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
to the truth of the Christian religion.</q> Warfield, in Presb. and Ref. Rev., April, 1893:208&mdash;<q>We
do not found the whole Christian system on the doctrine of inspiration....
Were there no such thing as inspiration, Christianity would be true, and all its
essential doctrines would be credibly witnessed to us</q>&mdash;in the gospels and in the living
church. F. L. Patton, Inspiration, 22&mdash;<q>I must take exception to the disposition of
some to stake the fortunes of Christianity on the doctrine of inspiration. Not that I
yield to any one in profound conviction of the truth and importance of the doctrine.
But it is proper for us to bear in mind the immense argumentative advantage which
Christianity has, aside altogether from the inspiration of the documents on which it
rests.</q> So argue also Sanday, Oracles of God, and Dale, The Living Christ.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. The Union of the Divine and Human Elements in Inspiration.</head>

<p>
1. The Scriptures are the production equally of God and of man, and
are therefore never to be regarded as merely human or merely divine.
</p>

<p>
The mystery of inspiration consists in neither of these terms separately,
but in the union of the two. Of this, however, there are analogies in the
interpenetration of human powers by the divine efficiency in regeneration
and sanctification, and in the union of the divine and human natures in the
person of Jesus Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
According to <q>Dalton's law,</q> each gas is as a vacuum to every other: <q>Gases are
mutually passive, and pass into each other as into vacua.</q> Each interpenetrates the
other. But this does not furnish a perfect illustration of our subject. The atom of
oxygen and the atom of nitrogen, in common air, remain side by side but they do not
unite. In inspiration the human and the divine elements do unite. The Lutheran
maxim, <q>Mens humana capax divinæ,</q> is one of the most important principles of a true
theology. <q>The Lutherans think of humanity as a thing made by God for himself and
to receive himself. The Reformed think of the Deity as ever preserving himself from
any confusion with the creature. They fear pantheism and idolatry</q> (Bp. of Salisbury,
quoted in Swayne, Our Lord's Knowledge, xx).
</p>

<p>
Sabatier, Philos. Religion, 66&mdash;<q>That initial mystery, the relation in our consciousness
between the individual and the universal element, between the finite and the
infinite, between God and man,&mdash;how can we comprehend their coëxistence and their
union, and yet how can we doubt it? Where is the thoughtful man to-day who has
not broken the thin crust of his daily life, and caught a glimpse of those profound and
obscure waters on which floats our consciousness? Who has not felt within himself a
veiled presence, and a force much greater than his own? What worker in a lofty
cause has not perceived within his own personal activity, and saluted with a feeling of
veneration, the mysterious activity of a universal and eternal Power? <q>In Deo vivimus,
movemur, et sumus.</q>... This mystery cannot be dissipated, for without it religion
itself would no longer exist.</q> Quackenbos, in Harper's Magazine, July, 1900:264, says
that <q>hypnotic suggestion is but inspiration.</q> The analogy of human influence thus
communicated may at least help us to some understanding of the divine.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. This union of the divine and human agencies in inspiration is not to
be conceived of as one of external impartation and reception.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, those whom God raised up and providentially qualified
to do this work, spoke and wrote the words of God, when inspired, not as
from without, but as from within, and that not passively, but in the most
conscious possession and the most exalted exercise of their own powers of
intellect, emotion, and will.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Holy Spirit does not dwell in man as water in a vessel. We may rather illustrate
the experience of the Scripture writers by the experience of the preacher who under the
influence of God's Spirit is carried beyond himself, and is conscious of a clearer apprehension
of truth and of a greater ability to utter it than belong to his unaided nature,
yet knows himself to be no passive vehicle of a divine communication, but to be as
never before in possession and exercise of his own powers. The inspiration of the
Scripture writers, however, goes far beyond the illumination granted to the preacher,
in that it qualifies them to put the truth, without error, into permanent and written
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
form. This inspiration, moreover, is more than providential preparation. Like miracles,
inspiration may use man's natural powers, but man's natural powers do not
explain it. Moses, David, Paul, and John were providentially endowed and educated
for their work of writing Scripture, but this endowment and education were not
inspiration itself, but only the preparation for it.
</p>

<p>
Beyschlag: <q>With John, remembrance and exposition had become inseparable.</q> E.
G. Robinson; <q>Novelists do not <emph>create</emph> characters,&mdash;they reproduce with modifications
material presented to their memories. So the apostles reproduced their impressions
of Christ.</q> Hutton, Essays, 2:231&mdash;<q>The Psalmists vacillate between the first person
and the third, when they deliver the purposes of God. As they warm with their spiritual
inspiration, they lose themselves in the person of Him who inspires them, and then
they are again recalled to themselves.</q> Stanley, Life and Letters, 1:380&mdash;<q>Revelation
is not resolved into a mere human process because we are able to distinguish the natural
agencies through which it was communicated</q>; 2:102&mdash;<q>You seem to me to
transfer too much to these ancient prophets and writers and chiefs our modern notions
of <emph>divine origin</emph>.... Our notion, or rather, the modern Puritanical notion of divine
origin, is of a preternatural force or voice, putting aside secondary agencies, and separated
from those agencies by an impassable gulf. The ancient, Oriental, Biblical notion
was of a supreme Will acting through those agencies, or rather, being inseparable from
them. <emph>Our</emph> notions of inspiration and divine communications insist on absolute perfection
of fact, morals, doctrine. The Biblical notion was that inspiration was compatible
with weakness, infirmity, contradiction.</q> Ladd, Philosophy of Mind, 182&mdash;<q>In inspiration
the thoughts, feelings, purposes are organized into another One than the self in
which they were themselves born. That other One is <emph>in themselves</emph>. They enter into
communication with Him. Yet this may be supernatural, even though natural psychological
means are used. Inspiration which is external is not inspiration at all.</q> This
last sentence, however, seems to us a needless exaggeration of the true principle.
Though God originally inspires from within, he may also communicate truth from
without.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
3. Inspiration, therefore, did not remove, but rather pressed into its
own service, all the personal peculiarities of the writers, together with their
defects of culture and literary style.
</p>

<p>
Every imperfection not inconsistent with truth in a human composition
may exist in inspired Scripture. The Bible is God's word, in the sense
that it presents to us divine truth in human forms, and is a revelation not
for a select class but for the common mind. Rightly understood, this very
humanity of the Bible is a proof of its divinity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Locke: <q>When God made the prophet, he did not unmake the man.</q> Prof. Day:
<q>The bush in which God appeared to Moses remained a bush, while yet burning with
the brightness of God and uttering forth the majesty of the mind of God.</q> The paragraphs
of the Koran are called <foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>ayat</foreign>, or <q>sign,</q> from their supposed supernatural
elegance. But elegant literary productions do not touch the heart. The Bible is not
merely the word of God; it is also the word made flesh. The Holy Spirit hides himself,
that he may show forth Christ (<emph>John 3:8</emph>); he is known only by his effects&mdash;a pattern
for preachers, who are ministers of the Spirit (<emph>2 Cor. 3:6</emph>). See Conant on Genesis, 65.
</p>

<p>
The Moslem declares that every word of the Koran came by the agency of Gabriel
from the seventh heaven, and that its very pronunciation is inspired. Better the doctrine
of Martineau, Seat of Authority, 289&mdash;<q>Though the pattern be divine, the web
that bears it must still be human.</q> Jackson, James Martineau, 255&mdash;<q>Paul's metaphor
of the <emph><q>treasure in earthen vessels</q> (2 Cor. 4:7)</emph> you cannot allow to give you guidance; you
want, not the treasure only, but the casket too, to come from above, and be of the
crystal of the sky. You want the record to be divine, not only in its spirit, but also in
its letter.</q> Charles Hodge, Syst. Theol., 1:157&mdash;<q>When God ordains praise out of the
mouths of babes, they must speak as babes, or the whole power and beauty of the
tribute will be lost.</q>
</p>

<p>
Evans, Bib. Scholarship and Inspiration, 16, 25&mdash;<q>The πνεῦμα of a dead wind is never
changed, as the Rabbis of old thought, into the πνεῦμα of a living spirit. The raven
that fed Elijah was nothing more than a bird. Nor does man, when supernaturally
influenced, cease to be a man. An inspired man is not God, nor a divinely manipulated
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
automaton</q>; <q>In Scripture there may be as much imperfection as, in the parts of any
organism, would be consistent with the perfect adaptation of that organism to its destined
end. Scripture then, taken together, is a statement of moral and religious truth
sufficient for men's salvation, or an infallible and sufficient rule of <emph>faith and practice</emph>.</q>
J. S. Wrightnour: <q>Inspire means to breathe in, as a flute-player breathes into his
instrument. As different flutes may have their own shapes, peculiarities, and what
might seem like defects, so here; yet all are breathed into by one Spirit. The same
Spirit who inspired them selected those instruments which were best for his purpose,
as the Savior selected his apostles. In these writings therefore is given us, in the precise
way that is best for us, the spiritual instruction and food that we need. Food for the
body is not always given in the most concentrated form, but in the form that is best
adapted for digestion. So God gives gold, not in coin ready stamped, but in the quartz
of the mine whence it has to be dug and smelted.</q> Remains of Arthur H. Hallam, in
John Brown's Rab and his Friends, 274&mdash;<q>I see that the Bible fits in to every fold of the
human heart. I am a man, and I believe it is God's book, because it is man's book.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
4. In inspiration God may use all right and normal methods of literary
composition.
</p>

<p>
As we recognize in literature the proper function of history, poetry, and
fiction; of prophecy, parable, and drama; of personification and proverb;
of allegory and dogmatic instruction; and even of myth and legend; we
cannot deny the possibility that God may use any one of these methods of
communicating truth, leaving it to us to determine in any single case which
of these methods he has adopted.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In inspiration, as in regeneration and sanctification, God works <emph><q>in divers manners</q> (Heb.
1:1)</emph>. The Scriptures, like the books of secular literature, must be interpreted in the
light of their purpose. Poetry must not be treated as prose, and parable must not be
made to <q>go on all fours,</q> when it was meant to walk erect and to tell one simple
story. Drama is not history, nor is personification to be regarded as biography. There
is a rhetorical overstatement which is intended only as a vivid emphasizing of important
truth. Allegory is a popular mode of illustration. Even myth and legend may
convey great lessons not otherwise apprehensible to infantile or untrained minds. A
literary sense is needed in our judgments of Scripture, and much hostile criticism is
lacking in this literary sense.
</p>

<p>
Denney, Studies in Theology, 218&mdash;<q>There is a stage in which the whole contents of
the mind, as yet incapable of science or history, may be called mythological. And what
criticism shows us, in its treatment of the early chapters of Genesis, is that God does
not disdain to speak to the mind, nor through it, even when it is at this lowly stage.
Even the myth, in which the beginnings of human life, lying beyond human research,
are represented to itself by the child-mind of the race, may be made the medium of
revelation.... But that does not make the first chapter of Genesis science, nor the
third chapter history. And what is of authority in these chapters is not the quasi-scientific
or quasi-historical form, but the message, which through them comes to the
heart, of God's creative wisdom and power.</q> Gore, in Lux Mundi, 356&mdash;<q>The various
sorts of mental or literary activity develop in their different lines out of an earlier
condition in which they lie fused and undifferentiated. This we can vaguely call the
mythical stage of mental evolution. A myth is not a falsehood; it is a product of
mental activity, as instructive and rich as any later product, but its characteristic is
that it is not yet distinguished into history and poetry and philosophy.</q> So Grote calls
the Greek myths the whole intellectual stock of the age to which they belonged&mdash;the
common root of all the history, poetry, philosophy, theology, which afterwards
diverged and proceeded from it. So the early part of Genesis may be of the nature of
myth in which we cannot distinguish the historical germ, though we do not deny that
it exists. Robert Browning's Clive and Andrea del Sarto are essentially correct representations
of historical characters, though the details in each poem are imaginary.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
5. The inspiring Spirit has given the Scriptures to the world by a process
of gradual evolution.
</p>

<p>
As in communicating the truths of natural science, God has communicated
the truths of religion by successive steps, germinally at first, more
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
fully as men have been able to comprehend them. The education of the
race is analogous to the education of the child. First came pictures,
object-lessons, external rites, predictions; then the key to these in Christ,
and then didactic exposition in the Epistles.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
There have been <emph><q>divers portions,</q></emph> as well as <emph><q>divers manners</q> (Heb. 1:1)</emph>. The early prophecies
like that of <emph>Gen. 3:15</emph>&mdash;the seed of the woman bruising the serpent's head&mdash;were
but faint glimmerings of the dawn. Men had to be raised up who were capable of
receiving and transmitting the divine communications. Moses, David, Isaiah mark
successive advances in recipiency and transparency to the heavenly light. Inspiration
has employed men of various degrees of ability, culture and religious insight. As all
the truths of the calculus lie germinally in the simplest mathematical axiom, so all the
truths of salvation may be wrapped up in the statement that God is holiness and love.
But not every scholar can evolve the calculus from the axiom. The teacher may dictate
propositions which the pupil does not understand: he may demonstrate in such a
way that the pupil participates in the process; or, best of all, he may incite the pupil
to work out the demonstration for himself. God seems to have used all these methods.
But while there are instances of dictation and illumination, and inspiration sometimes
includes these, the general method seems to have been such a divine quickening of
man's powers that he discovers and expresses the truth for himself.
</p>

<p>
A. J. Balfour, Foundations of Belief, 339&mdash;<q>Inspiration is that, seen from its divine
side, which we call discovery when seen from the human side.... Every addition to
knowledge, whether in the individual or the community, whether scientific, ethical or
theological, is due to a coöperation between the human soul which assimilates and the
divine power which inspires. Neither acts, or could act, in independent isolation. For
<q>unassisted reason</q> is a fiction, and pure receptivity it is impossible to conceive. Even
the emptiest vessel must limit the quantity and determine the configuration of any
liquid with which it may be filled.... Inspiration is limited to no age, to no country,
to no people.</q> The early Semites had it, and the great Oriental reformers. There can
be no gathering of grapes from thorns, or of figs from thistles. Whatever of true or
of good is found in human history has come from God. On the Progressiveness of
Revelation, see Orr, Problem of the O. T., 431-478.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
6. Inspiration did not guarantee inerrancy in things not essential to the
main purpose of Scripture.
</p>

<p>
Inspiration went no further than to secure a trustworthy transmission
by the sacred writers of the truth they were commissioned to deliver. It
was not omniscience. It was a bestowal of various kinds and degrees of
knowledge and aid, according to need; sometimes suggesting new truth,
sometimes presiding over the collection of preëxisting material and guarding
from essential error in the final elaboration. As inspiration was not
omniscience, so it was not complete sanctification. It involved neither
personal infallibility, nor entire freedom from sin.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
God can use imperfect means. As the imperfection of the eye does not disprove its
divine authorship, and as God reveals himself in nature and history in spite of their
shortcomings, so inspiration can accomplish its purpose through both writers and
writings in some respects imperfect. God is, in the Bible as he was in Hebrew history,
leading his people onward to Christ, but only by a progressive unfolding of the truth.
The Scripture writers were not perfect men. Paul at Antioch resisted Peter, <emph><q>because he
stood condemned</q> (Gal 2:11)</emph>. But Peter differed from Paul, not in public utterances, nor in
written words, but in following his own teachings (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Acts 15:6-11</emph>); <hi rend='italic'>versus</hi> Norman Fox,
in Bap. Rev., 1885:469-482. Personal defects do not invalidate an ambassador, though
they may hinder the reception of his message. So with the apostles' ignorance of the
time of Christ's second coming. It was only gradually that they came to understand
Christian doctrines; they did not teach the truth all at once; their final utterances supplemented
and completed the earlier; and all together furnished only that measure of
knowledge which God saw needful for the moral and religious teaching of mankind.
Many things are yet unrevealed, and many things which inspired men uttered, they
did not, when they uttered them, fully understand.
</p>

<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>

<p>
Pfleiderer, Grundriss, 53, 54&mdash;<q>The word is divine-human in the sense that it has for
its contents divine truth in human, historical, and individually conditioned form.
The Holy Scripture contains the word of God in a way plain, and entirely sufficient to
beget saving faith.</q> Frances Power Cobbe, Life, 87&mdash;<q>Inspiration is not a miraculous
and therefore incredible thing, but normal and in accordance with the natural relations
of the infinite and finite spirit, a divine inflowing of <emph>mental</emph> light precisely analogous to
that <emph>moral</emph> influence which divines call grace. As every devout and obedient soul may
expect to share in divine grace, so the devout and obedient souls of all the ages have
shared, as Parker taught, in divine inspiration. And, as the reception of grace even in
large measure does not render us <emph>impeccable</emph>, so neither does the reception of inspiration
render us <emph>infallible</emph>.</q> We may concede to Miss Cobbe that inspiration consists
with imperfection, while yet we grant to the Scripture writers an authority higher than
our own.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
7. Inspiration did not always, or even generally, involve a direct communication
to the Scripture writers of the words they wrote.
</p>

<p>
Thought is possible without words, and in the order of nature precedes
words. The Scripture writers appear to have been so influenced by the
Holy Spirit that they perceived and felt even the new truths they were to
publish, as discoveries of their own minds, and were left to the action of
their own minds in the expression of these truths, with the single exception
that they were supernaturally held back from the selection of wrong words,
and when needful were provided with right ones. Inspiration is therefore
not verbal, while yet we claim that no form of words which taken in its
connections would teach essential error has been admitted into Scripture.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Before expression there must be something to be expressed. Thought is possible
without language. The concept may exist without words. See experiences of deaf-mutes,
in Princeton Rev., Jan. 1881:104-128. The prompter interrupts only when the
speaker's memory fails. The writing-master guides the pupil's hand only when it would
otherwise go wrong. The father suffers the child to walk alone, except when it is in
danger of stumbling. If knowledge be rendered certain, it is as good as direct revelation.
But whenever the mere communication of ideas or the direction to proper
material would not suffice to secure a correct utterance, the sacred writers were guided
in the very selection of their words. Minute criticism proves more and more conclusively
the suitableness of the verbal dress to the thoughts expressed; all Biblical
exegesis is based, indeed, upon the assumption that divine wisdom has made the outward
form a trustworthy vehicle of the inward substance of revelation. See Henderson,
Inspiration (2nd ed.), 102, 114; Bib. Sac, 1872:428, 640; William James, Psychology,
1:266 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Watts, New Apologetic, 40, 111, holds to a verbal inspiration: <q>The bottles are not the
wine, but if the bottles perish the wine is sure to be spilled</q>; the inspiring Spirit certainly
gave language to Peter and others at Pentecost, for the apostles spoke with
other tongues; holy men of old not only thought, but <emph><q>spake from God, being moved by the Holy
Spirit</q> (2 Pet. 1:21)</emph>. So Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 171&mdash;<q>Why the minute study of
the <emph>words</emph> of Scripture, carried on by all expositors, their search after the precise shade
of verbal significance, their attention to the minutest details of language, and to all
the delicate coloring of mood and tense and accent?</q> Liberal scholars, Dr. Gordon
thinks, thus affirm the very doctrine which they deny. Rothe, Dogmatics, 238, speaks
of <q>a language of the Holy Ghost.</q> Oetinger: <q>It is the style of the heavenly court.</q>
But Broadus, an almost equally conservative scholar, in his Com. on <emph>Mat. 3:17</emph>, says that
the difference between <emph><q>This is my beloved Son,</q></emph> and <emph>Luke 3:22&mdash;<q>Thou art my beloved Son,</q></emph> should
make us cautious in theorizing about verbal inspiration, and he intimates that in some
cases that hypothesis is unwarranted. The theory of verbal inspiration is refuted by
the two facts: 1. that the N. T. quotations from the O. T., in 99 cases, differ both from
the Hebrew and from the LXX; 2. that Jesus' own words are reported with variations
by the different evangelists; see Marcus Dods, The Bible, its Origin and Nature,
chapter on Inspiration.
</p>

<p>
Helen Keller told Phillips Brooks that she had always known that there was a God,
but she had not known his name. Dr. Z. F. Westervelt, of the Deaf Mute Institute,
had under his charge four children of different mothers. All of these children were
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
dumb, though there was no defect of hearing and the organs of speech were perfect.
But their mothers had never loved them and had never talked to them in the loving
way that provoked imitation. The children heard scolding and harshness, but this did
not attract. So the older members of the church in private and in the meetings for
prayer should teach the younger to talk. But harsh and contentious talk will not
accomplish the result,&mdash;it must be the talk of Christian love. William D. Whitney, in
his review of Max Müller's Science of Language, 26-31, combats the view of Müller that
thought and language are identical. Major Bliss Taylor's reply to Santa Anna: <q>General
Taylor never surrenders!</q> was a substantially correct, though a diplomatic and
euphemistic, version of the General's actual profane words. Each Scripture writer
uttered old truth in the new forms with which his own experience had clothed it.
David reached his greatness by leaving off the mere repetition of Moses, and by speaking
out of his own heart. Paul reached his greatness by giving up the mere teaching
of what he had been taught, and by telling what God's plan of mercy was to all.
Augustine: <q>Scriptura est sensus Scripturæ</q>&mdash;<q>Scripture <emph>is</emph> what Scripture <emph>means</emph>.</q>
Among the theological writers who admit the errancy of Scripture writers as to some
matters unessential to their moral and spiritual teaching, are Luther, Calvin, Cocceius,
Tholuck, Neander, Lange, Stier, Van Oosterzee, John Howe, Richard Baxter, Conybeare,
Alford, Mead.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
8. Yet, notwithstanding the ever-present human element, the all-pervading
inspiration of the Scriptures constitutes these various writings an
organic whole.
</p>

<p>
Since the Bible is in all its parts the work of God, each part is to be
judged, not by itself alone, but in its connection with every other part.
The Scriptures are not to be interpreted as so many merely human productions
by different authors, but as also the work of one divine mind. Seemingly
trivial things are to be explained from their connection with the whole.
One history is to be built up from the several accounts of the life of Christ.
One doctrine must supplement another. The Old Testament is part of a
progressive system, whose culmination and key are to be found in the New.
The central subject and thought which binds all parts of the Bible together,
and in the light of which they are to be interpreted, is the person and work
of Jesus Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Bible says: <emph><q>There is no God</q> (Ps. 14:1)</emph>; but then, this is to be taken with the context:
<emph><q>The fool hath said in his heart.</q></emph> Satan's <emph><q>it is written,</q> (Mat. 4:6)</emph> is supplemented by
Christ's <emph><q>It is written again</q> (Mat. 4:7)</emph>. Trivialities are like the hair and nails of the body&mdash;they
have their place as parts of a complete and organic whole; see Ebrard, Dogmatik,
1:40. The verse which mentions Paul's cloak at Troas (2 Tim. 4:13) is (1) a sign of
genuineness&mdash;a forger would not invent it; (2) an evidence of temporal need endured
for the gospel; (3) an indication of the limits of inspiration,&mdash;even Paul must have
books and parchments. <emph>Col. 2:21&mdash;<q>Handle not, nor taste, nor touch</q></emph>&mdash;is to be interpreted by the
context in <emph>verse 20&mdash;<q>why ... do ye subject yourselves to ordinances?</q></emph> and by <emph>verse 22&mdash;<q>after the
precepts and doctrines of men.</q></emph> Hodge, Syst. Theol., 1:164&mdash;<q>The difference between John's
gospel and the book of Chronicles is like that between man's brain and the hair of his
head; nevertheless the life of the body is as truly in the hair as in the brain.</q> Like
railway coupons, Scripture texts are <q>Not good if detached.</q>
</p>

<p>
Crooker, The New Bible and its New Uses, 137-144, utterly denies the unity of the
Bible. Prof. A. B. Davidson of Edinburgh says that <q>A theology of the O. T. is really
an impossibility, because the O. T. is not a homogeneous whole.</q> These denials proceed
from an insufficient recognition of the principle of evolution in O. T. history and
doctrine. Doctrines in early Scripture are like rivers at their source; they are not
yet fully expanded; many affluents are yet to come. See Bp. Bull's Sermon, in Works,
xv:183; and Bruce, Apologetics, 323&mdash;<q>The literature of the early stages of revelation
must share the defects of the revelation which it records and interprets.... The
final revelation enables us to see the defects of the earlier.... We should find Christ
in the O. T. as we find the butterfly in the caterpillar, and man the crown of the universe
in the fiery cloud.</q> Crane, Religion of To-morrow, 224&mdash;Every part is to be modified
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
by every other part. No verse is true <emph>out of</emph> the Book, but the whole Book taken
together is true. Gore, in Lux Mundi, 350&mdash;<q>To recognize the inspiration of the
Scriptures is to put ourselves to school in every part of them.</q> Robert Browning, Ring
and Book, 175 (Pope, 228)&mdash;<q>Truth nowhere lies, yet everywhere, in these; Not absolutely
in a portion, yet Evolvable from the whole; evolved at last Painfully, held tenaciously
by me.</q> On the Organic Unity of the O. T., see Orr, Problem of the O. T., 27-51.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
9. When the unity of the Scripture is fully recognized, the Bible, in
spite of imperfections in matters non-essential to its religious purpose, furnishes
a safe and sufficient guide to truth and to salvation.
</p>

<p>
The recognition of the Holy Spirit's agency makes it rational and natural
to believe in the organic unity of Scripture. When the earlier parts are
taken in connection with the later, and when each part is interpreted by
the whole, most of the difficulties connected with inspiration disappear.
Taken together, with Christ as its culmination and explanation, the Bible
furnishes the Christian rule of faith and practice.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Bible answers two questions: What has God done to save me? and What must I
do to be saved? The propositions of Euclid are not invalidated by the fact that he
believed the earth to be flat. The ethics of Plato would not be disproved by his mistakes
with regard to the solar system. So religious authority is independent of merely secular
knowledge.&mdash;Sir Joshua Reynolds was a great painter, and a great teacher of his
art. His lectures on painting laid down principles which have been accepted as authority
for generations. But Joshua Reynolds illustrates his subject from history and
science. It was a day when both history and science were young. In some unimportant
matters of this sort, which do not in the least affect his conclusions, Sir Joshua
Reynolds makes an occasional slip; his statements are inaccurate. Does he, therefore,
cease to be an authority in matters of his art?&mdash;The Duke of Wellington said once that
no human being knew at what time of day the battle of Waterloo began. One historian
gets his story from one combatant, and he puts the hour at eleven in the morning.
Another historian gets his information from another combatant, and he puts it at noon.
Shall we say that this discrepancy argues error in the whole account, and that we have
no longer any certainty that the battle of Waterloo was ever fought at all?
</p>

<p>
Such slight imperfections are to be freely admitted, while at the same time we insist
that the Bible, taken as a whole, is incomparably superior to all other books, and is
<emph><q>able to make thee wise unto salvation</q> (2 Tim. 3:15)</emph>. Hooker, Eccl. Polity: <q>Whatsoever is
spoken of God or things pertaining to God otherwise than truth is, though it seem an
honor, it is an injury. And as incredible praises given unto men do often abate and
impair the credit of their deserved commendation, so we must likewise take great heed
lest, in attributing to Scripture more than it can have, the incredibility of that do
cause even those things which it hath more abundantly to be less reverently esteemed.</q>
Baxter, Works, 21:349&mdash;<q>Those men who think that these human imperfections
of the writers do extend further, and may appear in some passages of chronologies or
history which are no part of the rule of faith and life, do not hereby destroy the Christian
cause. For God might enable his apostles to an infallible recording and preaching
of the gospel, even all things necessary to salvation, though he had not made them
infallible in every by-passage and circumstance, any more than they were indefectible
in life.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Bible, says Beet, <q>contains possible errors in small details or allusions, but it
gives us with absolute certainty the great facts of Christianity, and upon these great
facts, and upon these only, our faith is based.</q> Evans, Bib. Scholarship and Inspiration,
15, 18, 65&mdash;<q>Teach that the shell is part of the kernel and men who find that they
cannot keep the shell will throw away shell and kernel together.... This overstatement
of inspiration made Renan, Bradlaugh and Ingersoll sceptics.... If in creation
God can work out a perfect result through imperfection why cannot he do the like
in inspiration? If in Christ God can appear in human weakness and ignorance, why
not in the <emph>written</emph> word?</q>
</p>

<p>
We therefore take exception to the view of Watts, New Apologetic, 71&mdash;<q>Let the
theory of historical errors and scientific errors be adopted, and Christianity must share
the fate of Hinduism. If its inspired writers err when they tell us of earthly things,
none will believe when they tell of heavenly things.</q> Watts adduces instances of
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
Spinoza's giving up the form while claiming to hold the substance, and in this way
reducing revelation to a phenomenon of naturalistic pantheism. We reply that no <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a
priori</foreign> theory of perfection in divine inspiration must blind us to the evidence of actual
imperfection in Scripture. As in creation and in Christ, so in Scripture, God humbles
himself to adopt human and imperfect methods of self-revelation. See Jonathan
Edwards, Diary: <q>I observe that old men seldom have any advantage of new discoveries,
because they are beside the way to which they have been so long used. <hi rend='italic'>Resolved</hi>,
if ever I live to years, that I will be impartial to hear the reasons of all pretended discoveries,
and receive them if rational, however long soever I have been used to another
way of thinking.</q>
</p>

<p>
Bowne, The Immanence of God, 109, 110&mdash;<q>Those who would find the source of certainty
and the seat of authority in the Scriptures alone, or in the church alone, or reason
and conscience alone, rather than in the complex and indivisible coworking of all
these factors, should be reminded of the history of religious thought. The stiffest doctrine
of Scripture inerrancy has not prevented warring interpretations; and those who
would place the seat of authority in reason and conscience are forced to admit that
outside illumination may do much for both. In some sense the religion of the spirit is
a very important fact, but when it sets up in opposition to the religion of a book, the
light that is in it is apt to turn to darkness.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
10. While inspiration constitutes Scripture an authority more trustworthy
than are individual reason or the creeds of the church, the only
ultimate authority is Christ himself.
</p>

<p>
Christ has not so constructed Scripture as to dispense with his personal
presence and teaching by his Spirit. The Scripture is the imperfect mirror
of Christ. It is defective, yet it reflects him and leads to him. Authority
resides not in it, but in him, and his Spirit enables the individual Christian
and the collective church progressively to distinguish the essential from
the non-essential, and so to perceive the truth as it is in Jesus. In thus
judging Scripture and interpreting Scripture, we are not rationalists, but
are rather believers in him who promised to be with us alway even unto
the end of the world and to lead us by his Spirit into all the truth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
James speaks of the law as a mirror (<emph>James 1:23-25&mdash;<q>like unto a man beholding his natural face in
a mirror ... looketh into the perfect law</q></emph>); the law convicts of sin because it reflects Christ.
Paul speaks of the gospel as a mirror (<emph>2 Cor. 3:18&mdash;<q>we all, beholding as in a mirror the glory of the
Lord</q></emph>); the gospel transforms us because it reflects Christ. Yet both law and gospel
are imperfect; they are like mirrors of polished metal, whose surface is often dim, and
whose images are obscure; (<emph>1 Cor. 13:12&mdash;<q>For now we see in a mirror, darkly; but then face to face</q></emph>);
even inspired men know only in part, and prophesy only in part. Scripture itself is the
conception and utterance of a child, to be done away when that which is perfect is
come, and we see Christ as he is.
</p>

<p>
Authority is the right to impose beliefs or to command obedience. The only ultimate
authority is God, for he is truth, justice and love. But he can impose beliefs and command
obedience only as he is known. Authority belongs therefore only to God revealed,
and because Christ is God revealed he can say: <emph><q>All authority hath been given unto me in heaven
and on earth</q> (Mat. 28:18)</emph>. The final authority in religion is Jesus Christ. Every one of
his revelations of God is authoritative. Both nature and human nature are such revelations.
He exercises his authority through delegated and subordinate authorities,
such as parents and civil government. These rightfully claim obedience so long as
they hold to their own respective spheres and recognize their relation of dependence
upon him. <emph><q>The powers that be are ordained of God</q> (Rom. 13:1)</emph>, even though they are imperfect
manifestations of his wisdom and righteousness. The decisions of the Supreme Court
are authoritative even though the judges are fallible and come short of establishing
absolute justice. Authority is not infallibility, in the government either of the family
or of the state.
</p>

<p>
The church of the middle ages was regarded as possessed of absolute authority. But
the Protestant Reformation showed how vain were these pretensions. The church is
an authority only as it recognizes and expresses the supreme authority of Christ. The
Reformers felt the need of some external authority in place of the church. They substituted
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
the Scripture. The phrase <q>the word of God,</q> which designates the truth
orally uttered or affecting the minds of men, came to signify only a book. Supreme
authority was ascribed to it. It often usurped the place of Christ. While we vindicate
the proper authority of Scripture, we would show that its authority is not immediate
and absolute, but mediate and relative, through human and imperfect records, and
needing a supplementary and divine teaching to interpret them. The authority of
Scripture is not apart from Christ or above Christ, but only in subordination to him
and to his Spirit. He who inspired Scripture must enable us to interpret Scripture.
This is not a doctrine of rationalism, for it holds to man's absolute dependence upon
the enlightening Spirit of Christ. It is not a doctrine of mysticism, for it holds that
Christ teaches us only by opening to us the meaning of his past revelations. We do not
expect any new worlds in our astronomy, nor do we expect any new Scriptures in our
theology. But we do expect that the same Christ who gave the Scriptures will give us
new insight into their meaning and will enable us to make new applications of their
teachings.
</p>

<p>
The right and duty of private judgment with regard to Scripture belong to no
ecclesiastical caste, but are inalienable liberties of the whole church of Christ and of
each individual member of that church. And yet this judgment is, from another
point of view, no private judgment. It is not the judgment of arbitrariness or caprice.
It does not make the Christian consciousness supreme, if we mean by this term the
consciousness of Christians apart from the indwelling Christ. When once we come to
Christ, he joins us to himself, he seats us with him upon his throne, he imparts to us his
Spirit, he bids us use our reason in his service. In judging Scripture, we make not ourselves
but Christ supreme, and recognize him as the only ultimate and infallible authority
in matters of religion. We can believe that the total revelation of Christ in Scripture is
an authority superior to individual reason or to any single affirmation of the church,
while yet we believe that this very authority of Scripture has its limitation, and that
Christ himself must teach us what this total revelation is. So the judgment which
Scripture encourages us to pass upon its own limitations only induces a final and more
implicit reliance upon the living and personal Son of God. He has never intended that
Scripture should be a substitute for his own presence, and it is only his Spirit that is
promised to lead us into all the truth.
</p>

<p>
On the authority of Scripture, see A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 113-136&mdash;<q>The
source of all authority is not Scripture, but Christ.... Nowhere are we told that the
Scripture of itself is able to convince the sinner or to bring him to God. It is a glittering
sword, but it is <emph><q>the sword of the Spirit</q> (Eph. 6:17)</emph>; and unless the Spirit use it, it will never
pierce the heart. It is a heavy hammer, but only the Spirit can wield it so that it breaks
in pieces the flinty rock. It is the type locked in the form, but the paper will never
receive an impression until the Spirit shall apply the power. No mere instrument
shall have the glory that belongs to God. Every soul shall feel its entire dependence
upon him. Only the Holy Spirit can turn the outer word into an inner word. And the
Holy Spirit is the Spirit of Christ. Christ comes into direct contact with the soul. He
himself gives his witness to the truth. He bears testimony to Scripture, even more
than Scripture bears testimony to him.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
11. The preceding discussion enables us at least to lay down three cardinal
principles and to answer three common questions with regard to
inspiration.
</p>

<p>
Principles: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The human mind can be inhabited and energized by God
while yet attaining and retaining its own highest intelligence and freedom.
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The Scriptures being the work of the one God, as well as of the men
in whom God moved and dwelt, constitute an articulated and organic unity.
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The unity and authority of Scripture as a whole are entirely consistent
with its gradual evolution and with great imperfection in its non-essential
parts.
</p>

<p>
Questions: (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Is any part of Scripture uninspired? Answer: Every
part of Scripture is inspired in its connection and relation with every
other part. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Are there degrees of inspiration? Answer: There are
degrees of value, but not of inspiration. Each part in its connection with
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
the rest is made completely true, and completeness has no degrees. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>)
How may we know what parts are of most value and what is the teaching
of the whole? Answer: The same Spirit of Christ who inspired the
Bible is promised to take of the things of Christ, and, by showing them to
us, to lead us progressively into all the truth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Notice the value of the Old Testament, revealing as it does the natural attributes of
God, as a basis and background for the revelation of mercy in the New Testament.
Revelation was in many parts <emph>(πολυμερῶς&mdash;Heb. 1:1)</emph> as well as in many ways. <q>Each
individual oracle, taken by itself, was partial and incomplete</q> (Robertson Smith, O. T.
in Jewish Ch., 21). But the person and the words of Christ sum up and complete the
revelation, so that, taken together and in their connection with him, the various parts
of Scripture constitute an infallible and sufficient rule of faith and practice. See
Browne, Inspiration of the N. T.; Bernard, Progress of Doctrine in the N. T.; Stanley
Leathes, Structure of the O. T.; Rainy, Delivery and Development of Doctrine. See
A. H. Strong, on Method of Inspiration, in Philosophy and Religion, 148-155.
</p>

<p>
The divine influence upon the minds of post-biblical writers, leading to the composition
of such allegories as Pilgrim's Progress, and such dramas as Macbeth, is to be
denominated illumination rather than inspiration, for the reasons that these writings
contain error as well as truth in matters of religion and morals; that they add nothing
essential to what the Scriptures give us; and that, even in their expression of truth
previously made known, they are not worthy of a place in the sacred canon. W. H. P.
Faunce: <q>How far is Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress true to present Christian experience?
It is untrue: 1. In its despair of this world. The Pilgrim has to leave this world in
order to be saved. Modern experience longs to do God's will <emph>here</emph>, and to save others
instead of forsaking them. 2. In its agony over sin and frightful conflict. Bunyan
illustrates modern experience better by Christiana and her children who go through
the Valley and the Shadow of Death in the daytime, and without conflict with Apollyon.
3. In the constant uncertainty of the issue of the Pilgrim's fight. Christian enters
Doubting Castle and meets Giant Despair, even after he has won most of his victories.
In modern experience, <emph><q>at evening time there shall be light</q>&mdash;(Zech. 14:7)</emph>. 4. In the constant
conviction of an absent Christ. Bunyan's Christ is never met this side of the Celestial
City. The Cross at which the burden dropped is the symbol of a sacrificial act, but it
is not the Savior himself. Modern experience has Christ living in us and with us
alway, and not simply a Christ whom we hope to see at the end of the journey.</q>
</p>

<p>
Beyschlag, N. T. Theol., 2:18&mdash;<q>Paul declares his own prophecy and inspiration to
be essentially imperfect (<emph>1 Cor. 13:9, 10, 12; cf. 1 Cor. 12:10; 1 Thess. 5:19-21</emph>). This admission
justifies a Christian criticism even of his views. He can pronounce an anathema on
those who preach <emph><q>a different gospel</q> (Gal. 1:8, 9)</emph>, for what belongs to simple faith, the facts
of salvation, are absolutely certain. But where prophetic thought and speech go
beyond these facts of salvation, wood and straw may be mingled with the gold, silver
and precious stones built upon the one foundation. So he distinguishes his own modest
γνώμη from the ἐπιταγὴ κυρίον (1 Cor. 7:25, 40).</q> Clarke, Christian Theology, 44&mdash;<q>The
authority of Scripture is not one that binds, but one that sets free. Paul is writing of
Scripture when he says: <emph><q>Not that we have lordship over your faith, but are helpers of your joy: for in faith
ye stand fast</q> (2 Cor. 1:24)</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Cremer, in Herzog, Realencyc., 183-203&mdash;<q>The church doctrine is <emph>that</emph> the Scriptures
are inspired, but it has never been determined by the church <emph>how</emph> they are inspired.</q>
Butler, Analogy, part <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii</hi>, chap. <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii</hi>&mdash;<q>The only question concerning the truth of Christianity
is, whether it be a real revelation, not whether it be attended with every circumstance
which we should have looked for; and concerning the authority of Scripture,
whether it be what it claims to be, not whether it be a book of such sort, and so
promulgated, as weak men are apt to fancy a book containing a divine revelation
should. And therefore, neither obscurity, nor seeming inaccuracy of style, nor
various readings, nor early disputes about the authors of particular parts, nor any
other things of the like kind, though they had been much more considerable than they
are, could overthrow the authority of the Scripture; unless the prophets, apostles, or
our Lord had promised that the book containing the divine revelation should be secure
from these things.</q> W. Robertson Smith: <q>If am asked why I receive the Scriptures
as the word of God and as the only perfect rule of faith and life, I answer with all the
Fathers of the Protestant church: <q>Because the Bible is the only record of the redeeming
love of God; because in the Bible alone I find God drawing nigh to men in Jesus
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
Christ, and declaring his will for our salvation. And the record I know to be true by
the witness of his Spirit in my heart, whereby I am assured that none other than God
himself is able to speak such words to my soul.</q></q> The gospel of Jesus Christ is the
ἅπαξ λεγόμενον of the Almighty. See Marcus Dods, The Bible, its Origin and Nature;
Bowne, The Immanence of God, 66-115.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>V. Objections to the Doctrine of Inspiration.</head>

<p>
In connection with a divine-human work like the Bible, insoluble difficulties
may be expected to present themselves. So long, however, as its
inspiration is sustained by competent and sufficient evidence, these difficulties
cannot justly prevent our full acceptance of the doctrine, any more than
disorder and mystery in nature warrant us in setting aside the proofs of its
divine authorship. These difficulties are lessened with time; some have
already disappeared; many may be due to ignorance, and may be removed
hereafter; those which are permanent may be intended to stimulate inquiry
and to discipline faith.
</p>

<p>
It is noticeable that the common objections to inspiration are urged, not
so much against the religious teaching of the Scriptures, as against certain
errors in secular matters which are supposed to be interwoven with it. But
if these are proved to be errors indeed, it will not necessarily overthrow
the doctrine of inspiration; it will only compel us to give a larger place
to the human element in the composition of the Scriptures, and to regard
them more exclusively as a text-book of religion. As a rule of religious
faith and practice, they will still be the infallible word of God. The Bible
is to be judged as a book whose one aim is man's rescue from sin and
reconciliation to God, and in these respects it will still be found a record
of substantial truth. This will appear more fully as we examine the objections
one by one.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The Scriptures are given to teach us, not how the heavens go, but how to go to
heaven.</q> Their aim is certainly not to teach science or history, except so far as science
or history is essential to their moral and religious purpose. Certain of their doctrines,
like the virgin-birth of Christ and his bodily resurrection, are historical facts, and certain
facts, like that of creation, are also doctrines. With regard to these great facts,
we claim that inspiration has given us accounts that are essentially trustworthy, whatever
may be their imperfections in detail. To undermine the scientific trustworthiness
of the Indian Vedas is to undermine the religion which they teach. But this only
because their scientific doctrine is an essential part of their religious teaching. In the
Bible, religion is not dependent upon physical science. The Scriptures aim only to
declare the creatorship and lordship of the personal God. The method of his working
may be described pictorially without affecting this substantial truth. The Indian cosmogonies,
on the other hand, polytheistic or pantheistic as they are, teach essential
untruth, by describing the origin of things as due to a series of senseless transformations
without basis of will or wisdom.
</p>

<p>
So long as the difficulties of Scripture are difficulties of form rather than substance,
of its incidental features rather than its main doctrine, we may say of its obscurities as
Isocrates said of the work of Heraclitus: <q>What I understand of it is so excellent
that I can draw conclusions from it concerning what I do not understand.</q> <q>If Bengel
finds things in the Bible too hard for his critical faculty, he finds nothing too hard
for his believing faculty.</q> With John Smyth, who died at Amsterdam in 1612, we may
say: <q>I profess I have changed, and shall be ready still to change, for the better</q>; and
with John Robinson, in his farewell address to the Pilgrim Fathers: <q>I am verily persuaded
that the Lord hath more truth yet to break forth from his holy word.</q> See
Luthardt, Saving Truths, 205; Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 205 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Bap. Rev., April, 1881:
art. by O. P. Eaches; Cardinal Newman, in 19th Century, Feb. 1884.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Errors in matters of Science.</head>

<p>
Upon this objection we remark:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) We do not admit the existence of scientific error in the Scripture.
What is charged as such is simply truth presented in popular and impressive
forms.
</p>

<p>
The common mind receives a more correct idea of unfamiliar facts when
these are narrated in phenomenal language and in summary form than
when they are described in the abstract terms and in the exact detail of
science.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Scripture writers unconsciously observe Herbert Spencer's principle of style:
Economy of the reader's or hearer's attention,&mdash;the more energy is expended upon the
form the less there remains to grapple with the substance (Essays, 1-47). Wendt,
Teaching of Jesus, 1:130, brings out the principle of Jesus' style: <q>The greatest clearness
in the smallest compass.</q> Hence Scripture uses the phrases of common life
rather than scientific terminology. Thus the language of appearance is probably used
in <emph>Gen. 7:19&mdash;<q>all the high mountains that were under the whole heaven were covered</q></emph>&mdash;such would be the
appearance, even if the deluge were local instead of universal; in <emph>Josh. 10:12, 13&mdash;<q>and the
sun stood still</q></emph>&mdash;such would be the appearance, even if the sun's rays were merely refracted
so as preternaturally to lengthen the day; in <emph>Ps. 93:1&mdash;<q>The world also is established, that it
cannot be moved</q></emph>&mdash;such is the appearance, even though the earth turns on its axis and
moves round the sun. In narrative, to substitute for <q>sunset</q> some scientific description
would divert attention from the main subject. Would it be preferable, in the
O. T., if we should read: <q>When the revolution of the earth upon its axis caused the rays
of the solar luminary to impinge horizontally upon the retina, <emph>Isaac went out to meditate</emph></q> (<emph>Gen.
24:63</emph>)? <q>Le secret d'ennuyer est de tout dire.</q> Charles Dickens, in his American
Notes, 72, describes a prairie sunset: <q>The decline of day here was very gorgeous,
tinging the firmament deeply with red and gold, up to the very keystone of the arch
above us</q> (quoted by Hovey, Manual of Christian Theology, 97). Did Dickens therefore
believe the firmament to be a piece of solid masonry?
</p>

<p>
Canon Driver rejects the Bible story of creation because the distinctions made by
modern science cannot be found in the primitive Hebrew. He thinks the fluid state of
the earth's substance should have been called <q>surging chaos,</q> instead of <emph><q>waters</q> (Gen.
1:2)</emph>. <q>An admirable phrase for modern and cultivated minds,</q> replies Mr. Gladstone,
<q>but a phrase that would have left the pupils of the Mosaic writer in exactly the condition
out of which it was his purpose to bring them, namely, a state of utter ignorance
and darkness, with possibly a little ripple of bewilderment to boot</q>; see Sunday School
Times, April 26, 1890. The fallacy of holding that Scripture gives in detail all the facts
connected with a historical narrative has led to many curious arguments. The Gregorian
Calendar which makes the year begin in January was opposed by representing
that Eve was tempted at the outset by an apple, which was possible only in case the
year began in September; see Thayer, Change of Attitude towards the Bible, 46.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It is not necessary to a proper view of inspiration to suppose that
the human authors of Scripture had in mind the proper scientific interpretation
of the natural events they recorded.
</p>

<p>
It is enough that this was in the mind of the inspiring Spirit. Through
the comparatively narrow conceptions and inadequate language of the
Scripture writers, the Spirit of inspiration may have secured the expression
of the truth in such germinal form as to be intelligible to the times
in which it was first published, and yet capable of indefinite expansion as
science should advance. In the miniature picture of creation in the first
chapter of Genesis, and in its power of adjusting itself to every advance of
scientific investigation, we have a strong proof of inspiration.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The word <emph><q>day</q></emph> in <emph>Genesis 1</emph> is an instance of this general mode of expression. It would
be absurd to teach early races, that deal only in small numbers, about the myriads of
years of creation. The child's object-lesson, with its graphic summary, conveys to his
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
mind more of truth than elaborate and exact statement would convey. Conant (<emph>Genesis
2:10</emph>) says of the description of Eden and its rivers: <q>Of course the author's object is
not a minute topographical description, but a general and impressive conception as a
whole.</q> Yet the progress of science only shows that these accounts are not less but
more true than was supposed by those who first received them. Neither the Hindu
Shasters nor any heathen cosmogony can bear such comparison with the results of
science. Why change our interpretations of Scripture so often? Answer: We do not
assume to be original teachers of science, but only to interpret Scripture with the new
lights we have. See Dana, Manual of Geology, 741-746; Guyot, in Bib. Sac., 1855:324;
Dawson, Story of Earth and Man, 32.
</p>

<p>
This conception of early Scripture teaching as elementary and suited to the childhood
of the race would make it possible, if the facts so required, to interpret the early chapters
of Genesis as mythical or legendary. God might condescend to <q>Kindergarten formulas.</q>
Goethe said that <q>We should deal with children as God deals with us: we are
happiest under the influence of innocent delusions.</q> Longfellow: <q>How beautiful is
youth! how bright it gleams, With its illusions, aspirations, dreams! Book of beginnings,
story without end, Each maid a heroine, and each man a friend!</q> We might
hold with Goethe and with Longfellow, if we only excluded from God's teaching all
essential error. The narratives of Scripture might be addressed to the imagination,
and so might take mythical or legendary form, while yet they conveyed substantial
truth that could in no other way be so well apprehended by early man; see Robert
Browning's poem, <q>Development,</q> in Asolando. The Koran, on the other hand, leaves
no room for imagination, but fixes the number of the stars and declares the firmament
to be solid. Henry Drummond: <q>Evolution has given us a new Bible.... The Bible
is not a book which has been made,&mdash;it has grown.</q>
</p>

<p>
Bagehot tells us that <q>One of the most remarkable of Father Newman's Oxford sermons
explains how science teaches that the earth goes round the sun, and how Scripture
teaches that the sun goes round the earth; and it ends by advising the discreet
believer to accept both.</q> This is mental bookkeeping by double entry; see Mackintosh,
in Am. Jour. Theology, Jan. 1899:41. Lenormant, in Contemp. Rev., Nov. 1879&mdash;<q>While
the tradition of the deluge holds so considerable a place in the legendary memories of
all branches of the Aryan race, the monuments and original texts of Egypt, with their
many cosmogonic speculations, have not afforded any, even distant, allusion to this
cataclysm.</q> Lenormant here wrongly assumed that the language of Scripture is scientific
language. If it is the language of appearance, then the deluge may be a local and
not a universal catastrophe. G. F. Wright, Ice Age in North America, suggests that
the numerous traditions of the deluge may have had their origin in the enormous
floods of the receding glacier. In South-western Queensland, the standard gauge at
the Meteorological Office registered 10-¾, 20, 35-¾, 10-¾ inches of rainfall, in all 77-¼ inches,
in four successive days.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It may be safely said that science has not yet shown any fairly
interpreted passage of Scripture to be untrue.
</p>

<p>
With regard to the antiquity of the race, we may say that owing to the
differences of reading between the Septuagint and the Hebrew there is room
for doubt whether either of the received chronologies has the sanction of
inspiration. Although science has made probable the existence of man
upon the earth at a period preceding the dates assigned in these chronologies,
no statement of inspired Scripture is thereby proved false.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Usher's scheme of chronology, on the basis of the Hebrew, puts the creation 4004
years before Christ. Hales's, on the basis of the Septuagint, puts it 5411 B. C. The
Fathers followed the LXX. But the genealogies before and after the flood may present
us only with the names of <q>leading and representative men.</q> Some of these
names seem to stand, not for individuals, but for tribes, <hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>: <emph>Gen. 10:16</emph>&mdash;where Canaan
is said to have begotten the Jebusite and the Amorite; 29&mdash;Joktan begot Ophir and
Havilah. In <emph>Gen. 10:6</emph>, we read that Mizraim belonged to the sons of Ham. But Mizraim
is a dual, coined to designate the two parts, Upper and Lower Egypt. Hence a son of
Ham could not bear the name of Mizraim. <emph>Gen. 10:13</emph> reads: <emph><q>And Mizraim begat Ludim.</q></emph> But
Ludim is a plural form. The word signifies a whole nation, and <emph><q>begat</q></emph> is not employed
in a literal sense. So in <emph>verses 15, 16: <q>Canaan begat ... the Jebusite,</q></emph> a tribe; the ancestors of
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
which would have been called Jebus. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, however, are names,
not of tribes or nations, but of individuals; see Prof. Edward König, of Bonn, in S. S.
Times, Dec. 14, 1901. E. G. Robinson: <q>We may pretty safely go back to the time of
Abraham, but no further.</q> Bib. Sac., 1899:403&mdash;<q>The lists in Genesis may relate to
families and not to individuals.</q>
</p>

<p>
G. F. Wright, Ant. and Origin of Human Race, lect. II&mdash;<q>When in David's time it
is said that <emph><q>Shebuel, the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, was ruler over the treasures</q> (1 Chron. 23:16;
26:24)</emph>, Gershom was the immediate son of Moses, but Shebuel was separated by many
generations from Gershom. So when Seth is said to have begotten Enosh when he was
105 years old (<emph>Gen. 5:6</emph>), it is, according to Hebrew usage, capable of meaning that Enosh
was descended from the branch of Seth's line which set off at the 105th year, with any
number of intermediate links omitted.</q> The appearance of completeness in the text
may be due to alteration of the text in the course of centuries; see Bib. Com., 1:30.
In the phrase <emph><q>Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham</q> (Mat. 1:1)</emph> thirty-eight to forty
generations are omitted. It may be so in some of the Old Testament genealogies.
There is room for a hundred thousand years, if necessary (Conant). W. H. Green, in
Bib. Sac., April, 1890:303, and in Independent, June 18, 1891&mdash;<q>The Scriptures furnish
us with no data for a chronological computation prior to the life of Abraham. The
Mosaic records do not fix, and were not intended to fix, the precise date of the Flood
or of the Creation.... They give a series of specimen lives, with appropriate numbers
attached, to show by selected examples what was the original term of human life. To
make them a complete and continuous record, and to deduce from them the antiquity
of the race, is to put them to a use they were never intended to serve.</q>
</p>

<p>
Comparison with secular history also shows that no such length of time as 100,000
years for man's existence upon earth seems necessary. Rawlinson, in Jour. Christ.
Philosophy, 1883:339-364, dates the beginning of the Chaldean monarchy at 2400 B. C.
Lenormant puts the entrance of the Sanskritic Indians into Hindustan at 2500 B. C.
The earliest Vedas are between 1200 and 1000 B. C. (Max Müller). Call of Abraham,
probably 1945 B. C. Chinese history possibly began as early as 2356 B. C. (Legge).
The old Empire in Egypt possibly began as early as 2650 B. C. Rawlinson puts the flood
at 3600 B. C., and adds 2000 years between the deluge and the creation, making the age
of the world 1886 + 3600 + 2000 = 7486. S. R. Pattison, in Present Day Tracts, 3: no. 13,
concludes that <q>a term of about 8000 years is warranted by deductions from history,
geology, and Scripture.</q> See also Duke of Argyll, Primeval Man, 76-128; Cowles on
Genesis, 49-80; Dawson, Fossil Men, 246; Hicks, in Bap. Rev., July, 1884 (15000 years);
Zöckler, Urgeschichte der Erde und des Menschen, 137-163. On the critical side, see
Crooker, The New Bible and its Uses, 80-102.
</p>

<p>
Evidence of a geological nature seems to be accumulating, which tends to prove
man's advent upon earth at least ten thousand years ago. An arrowhead of tempered
copper and a number of human bones were found in the Rocky Point mines, near Gilman,
Colorado, 460 feet beneath the surface of the earth, embedded in a vein of silver-bearing
ore. More than a hundred dollars worth of ore clung to the bones when they
were removed from the mine. On the age of the earth and the antiquity of man, see
G. F. Wright, Man and the Glacial Epoch, lectures <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv</hi> and <hi rend='smallcaps'>x</hi>, and in McClure's Magazine,
June, 1901, and Bib. Sac., 1903:31&mdash;<q>Charles Darwin first talked about 300 million
years as a mere trifle of geologic time. His son George limits it to 50 or 100 million;
Croll and Young to 60 or 70 million; Wallace to 28 million; Lord Kelvin to 24
million; Thompson and Newcomb to only 10 million.</q> Sir Archibald Geikie, at the
British Association at Dover in 1899, said that 100 million years sufficed for that small
portion of the earth's history which is registered in the stratified rocks of the crust.
</p>

<p>
Shaler, Interpretation of Nature, 122, considers vegetable life to have existed on the
planet for at least 100 million years. Warren Upham, in Pop. Science Monthly, Dec.
1893:153&mdash;<q>How old is the earth? 100 million years.</q> D. G. Brinton, in Forum, Dec.
1893:454, puts the minimum limit of man's existence on earth at 50,000 years. G. F.
Wright does not doubt that man's presence on this continent was preglacial, say eleven
or twelve thousand years ago. He asserts that there has been a subsidence of Central
Asia and Southern Russia since man's advent, and that Arctic seals are still found in
Lake Baikal in Siberia. While he grants that Egyptian civilization may go back to
5000 B. C., he holds that no more than 6000 or 7000 years before this are needed as preparation
for history. Le Conte, Elements of Geology, 613&mdash;<q>Men saw the great glaciers of
the second glacial epoch, but there is no reliable evidence of their existence before the
first glacial epoch. Deltas, implements, lake shores, waterfalls, indicate only 7000 to
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
10,000 years.</q> Recent calculations of Prof. Prestwich, the most eminent living geologist
of Great Britain, tend to bring the close of the glacial epoch down to within 10,000
or 15,000 years.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Even if error in matters of science were found in Scripture, it would
not disprove inspiration, since inspiration concerns itself with science only
so far as correct scientific views are necessary to morals and religion.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Great harm results from identifying Christian doctrine with specific theories of the
universe. The Roman church held that the revolution of the sun around the earth
was taught in Scripture, and that Christian faith required the condemnation of Galileo;
John Wesley thought Christianity to be inseparable from a belief in witchcraft;
opposers of the higher criticism regard the Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch as
<q>articulus stantis vel cadentis ecclesiæ.</q> We mistake greatly when we link inspiration
with scientific doctrine. The purpose of Scripture is not to teach science, but to
teach religion, and, with the exception of God's creatorship and preserving agency in
the universe, no scientific truth is essential to the system of Christian doctrine. Inspiration
might leave the Scripture writers in possession of the scientific ideas of their
time, while yet they were empowered correctly to declare both ethical and religious
truth. A right spirit indeed gains some insight into the meaning of nature, and so the
Scripture writers seem to be preserved from incorporating into their productions
much of the scientific error of their day. But entire freedom from such error must
not be regarded as a necessary accompaniment of inspiration.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Errors in matters of History.</head>

<p>
To this objection we reply:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) What are charged as such are often mere mistakes in transcription,
and have no force as arguments against inspiration, unless it can first be
shown that inspired documents are by the very fact of their inspiration
exempt from the operation of those laws which affect the transmission of
other ancient documents.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We have no right to expect that the inspiration of the original writer will be followed
by a miracle in the case of every copyist. Why believe in infallible copyists, more than
in infallible printers? God educates us to care for his word, and for its correct transmission.
Reverence has kept the Scriptures more free from various readings than
are other ancient manuscripts. None of the existing variations endanger any important
article of faith. Yet some mistakes in transcription there probably are. In <emph>1 Chron.
22:14</emph>, instead of 100,000 talents of gold and 1,000,000 talents of silver (= $3,750,000,000),
Josephus divides the sum by ten. Dr. Howard Osgood: <q>A French writer, Revillout,
has accounted for the differing numbers in Kings and Chronicles, just as he accounts
for the same differences in Egyptian and Assyrian later accounts, by the change in the
value of money and debasement of issues. He shows the change all over Western
Asia.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Bacon, Genesis of Genesis, 45.
</p>

<p>
In <emph>2 Chron. 13:3, 17</emph>, where the numbers of men in the armies of little Palestine are
stated as 400,000 and 800,000, and 500,000 are said to have been slain in a single battle,
<q>some ancient copies of the Vulgate and Latin translations of Josephus have 40,000,
80,000, and 50,000</q>; see Annotated Paragraph Bible, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>. In <emph>2 Chron. 17:14-19</emph>, Jehoshaphat's
army aggregates 1,160,000, besides the garrisons of his fortresses. It is
possible that by errors in transcription these numbers have been multiplied by ten.
Another explanation however, and perhaps a more probable one, is given under (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>)
below. Similarly, compare <emph>1 Sam. 6:19</emph>, where 50,070 are slain, with the 70 of Josephus;
<emph>2 Sam. 8:4&mdash;<q>1,700 horsemen,</q></emph> with <emph>1 Chron. 18:4&mdash;<q>7,000 horsemen</q></emph>; <emph>Esther 9:16</emph>&mdash;75,000 slain by the
Jews, with LXX&mdash;15,000. In <emph>Mat. 27:9</emph>, we have <emph><q>Jeremiah</q></emph> for <emph><q>Zechariah</q></emph>&mdash;this Calvin
allows to be a mistake; and, if a mistake, then one made by the first copyist, for it
appears in all the uncials, all the manuscripts and all the versions except the Syriac
Peshito where it is omitted, evidently on the authority of the individual transcriber
and translator. In <emph>Acts 7:16&mdash;<q>the tomb that Abraham bought</q></emph>&mdash;Hackett regards <emph><q>Abraham</q></emph> as
a clerical error for <q>Jacob</q> (compare <emph>Gen. 33:18, 19</emph>). See Bible Com., 3:165, 249, 251,
317.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Other so-called errors are to be explained as a permissible use of
round numbers, which cannot be denied to the sacred writers except upon
the principle that mathematical accuracy was more important than the
general impression to be secured by the narrative.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In <emph>Numbers 25:9</emph>, we read that there fell in the plague 24,000; <emph>1 Cor. 10:8</emph> says 23,000. The
actual number was possibly somewhere between the two. Upon a similar principle, we
do not scruple to celebrate the Landing of the Pilgrims on December 22nd and the
birth of Christ on December 25th. We speak of the battle of Bunker Hill, although at
Bunker Hill no battle was really fought. In <emph>Ex. 12:40, 41</emph>, the sojourn of the Israelites in
Egypt is declared to be 430 years. Yet Paul, in <emph>Gal. 3:17</emph>, says that the giving of the law
through Moses was 430 years after the call of Abraham, whereas the call of Abraham
took place 215 years before Jacob and his sons went down into Egypt, and Paul should
have said 645 years instead of 430. Franz Delitzsch: <q>The Hebrew Bible counts four
centuries of Egyptian sojourn (<emph>Gen. 15:13-16</emph>), more accurately, 430 years (<emph>Ex. 12:40</emph>); but
according to the LXX (<emph>Ex. 12:40</emph>) this number comprehends the sojourn in Canaan and
Egypt, so that 215 years come to the pilgrimage in Canaan, and 215 to the servitude in
Egypt. This kind of calculation is not exclusively Hellenistic; it is also found in the
oldest Palestinian Midrash. Paul stands on this side in <emph>Gal. 3:17</emph>, making, not the immigration
into Egypt, but the covenant with Abraham the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>terminus a quo</foreign> of the 430 years
which end in the Exodus from Egypt and in the legislation</q>; see also Hovey, Com. on
<emph>Gal. 3:17</emph>. It was not Paul's purpose to write chronology,&mdash;so he may follow the LXX,
and call the time between the promise to Abraham and the giving of the law to Moses
430 years, rather than the actual 600. If he had given the larger number, it might have
led to perplexity and discussion about a matter which had nothing to do with the vital
question in hand. Inspiration may have employed current though inaccurate statements
as to matters of history, because they were the best available means of impressing
upon men's minds truth of a more important sort. In <emph>Gen. 15:13</emph> the 430 years is
called in round numbers 400 years, and so in <emph>Acts 7:6</emph>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Diversities of statement in accounts of the same event, so long as
they touch no substantial truth, may be due to the meagreness of the
narrative, and might be fully explained if some single fact, now unrecorded,
were only known. To explain these apparent discrepancies would not only
be beside the purpose of the record, but would destroy one valuable
evidence of the independence of the several writers or witnesses.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
On the Stokes trial, the judge spoke of two apparently conflicting testimonies as
neither of them necessarily false. On the difference between Matthew and Luke as
to the scene of the Sermon on the Mount (<emph>Mat. 5:1</emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Luke 6:17</emph>) see Stanley, Sinai and
Palestine, 360. As to one blind man or two (<emph>Mat. 20:30</emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Luke 18:35</emph>) see Bliss, Com. on
Luke, 275, and Gardiner, in Bib. Sac., July, 1879:513, 514; Jesus may have healed the blind
men during a day's excursion from Jericho, and it might be described as <q>when they
went out,</q> or <q>as they drew nigh to Jericho.</q> Prof. M. B. Riddle: <q><emph>Luke 18:35</emph> describes
the general movement towards Jerusalem and not the precise detail preceding the miracle;
<emph>Mat. 20:30</emph> intimates that the miracle occurred during an excursion from the city,&mdash;Luke
afterwards telling of the final departure</q>; Calvin holds to two meetings; Godet
to two cities; if Jesus healed two blind men, he certainly healed one, and Luke did not
need to mention more than one, even if he knew of both; see Broadus on <emph>Mat. 20:30</emph>. In
<emph>Mat. 8:28</emph>, where Matthew has two demoniacs at Gadara and Luke has only one at Gerasa,
Broadus supposes that the village of Gerasa belonged to the territory of the city of
Gadara, a few miles to the Southeast of the lake, and he quotes the case of Lafayette:
<q>In the year 1824 Lafayette visited the United States and was welcomed with honors
and pageants. Some historians will mention only Lafayette, but others will relate the
same visit as made and the same honors as enjoyed by two persons, namely, Lafayette
and his son. Will not both be right?</q> On Christ's last Passover, see Robinson,
Harmony, 212; E. H. Sears, Fourth Gospel, Appendix A; Edersheim, Life and Times
of the Messiah, 2:507. Augustine: <q>Locutiones variæ, sed non contrariæ: dlversæ, sed
non adversæ.</q>
</p>

<p>
Bartlett, in Princeton Rev., Jan. 1880:46, 47, gives the following modern illustrations:
Winslow's Journal (of Plymouth Plantation) speaks of a ship sent out <q>by Master
Thomas Weston.</q> But Bradford in his far briefer narrative of the matter, mentions it
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
as sent <q>by Mr. Weston and another.</q> John Adams, in his letters, tells the story of the
daughter of Otis about her father's destruction of his own manuscripts. At one time
he makes her say: <q>In one of his unhappy moments he committed them all to the
flames</q>; yet, in the second letter, she is made to say that <q>he was several days in doing
it.</q> One newspaper says: President Hayes attended the Bennington centennial;
another newspaper says: the President and Mrs. Hayes; a third: the President and his
Cabinet; a fourth: the President, Mrs. Hayes and a majority of his Cabinet. Archibald
Forbes, in his account of Napoleon III at Sedan, points out an agreement of narratives
as to the salient points, combined with <q>the hopeless and bewildering discrepancies as
to details,</q> even as these are reported by eye-witnesses, including himself, Bismarck,
and General Sheridan who was on the ground, as well as others.
</p>

<p>
Thayer, Change of Attitude, 52, speaks of Luke's <q>plump anachronism in the matter
of Theudas</q>&mdash;<emph>Acts 5:36&mdash;<q>For before those days rose up Theudas.</q></emph> Josephus, Antiquities, 20:5:1,
mentions an insurrectionary Theudas, but the date and other incidents do not agree with
those of Luke. Josephus however may have mistaken the date as easily as Luke, or he
may refer to another man of the same name. The inscription on the Cross is given in
<emph>Mark 15:26</emph>, as <emph><q>The King of the Jews</q></emph>; in <emph>Luke 23:38</emph>, as <emph><q>This is the King of the Jews</q></emph>; in <emph>Mat. 27:37</emph>, as
<emph><q>This is Jesus the King of the Jews</q></emph>; and in <emph>John 19:19</emph>, as <emph><q>Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews.</q></emph> The
entire superscription, in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, may have contained every word
given by the several evangelists combined, and may have read <q>This is Jesus of Nazareth,
the King of the Jews,</q> and each separate report may be entirely correct so far as
it goes. See, on the general subject, Haley, Alleged Discrepancies; Fisher, Beginnings
of Christianity, 406-412.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) While historical and archæological discovery in many important
particulars goes to sustain the general correctness of the Scripture narratives,
and no statement essential to the moral and religious teaching of
Scripture has been invalidated, inspiration is still consistent with much
imperfection in historical detail and its narratives <q>do not seem to be
exempted from possibilities of error.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The words last quoted are those of Sanday. In his Bampton Lectures on Inspiration,
400, he remarks that <q>Inspiration belongs to the historical books rather as conveying a
religious lesson, than as histories; rather as interpreting, than as narrating plain matter
of fact. The crucial issue is that in these last respects they do not seem to be exempted
from possibilities of error.</q> R. V. Foster, Systematic Theology, (Cumberland Presbyterian):
The Scripture writers <q>were not inspired to do otherwise than to take these
statements as they found them.</q> Inerrancy is not freedom from misstatements, but
from error defined as <q>that which misleads in any serious or important sense.</q> When
we compare the accounts of <emph>1</emph> and <emph>2 Chronicles</emph> with those of <emph>1</emph> and <emph>2 Kings</emph> we find in the former
an exaggeration of numbers, a suppression of material unfavorable to the writer's
purpose, and an emphasis upon that which is favorable, that contrasts strongly with
the method of the latter. These characteristics are so continuous that the theory of
mistakes in transcription does not seem sufficient to account for the facts. The
author's aim was to draw out the religious lessons of the story, and historical details
are to him of comparative unimportance.
</p>

<p>
H. P. Smith, Bib. Scholarship and Inspiration, 108&mdash;<q>Inspiration did not correct the
Chronicler's historical point of view, more than it corrected his scientific point of view,
which no doubt made the earth the centre of the solar system. It therefore left him
open to receive documents, and to use them, which idealized the history of the past,
and described David and Solomon according to the ideas of later times and the priestly
class. David's sins are omitted, and numbers are multiplied, to give greater dignity to
the earlier kingdom.</q> As Tennyson's Idylls of the King give a nobler picture of King
Arthur, and a more definite aspect to his history, than actual records justify, yet the
picture teaches great moral and religious lessons, so the Chronicler seems to have manipulated
his material in the interest of religion. Matters of arithmetic were minor
matters. <q>Majoribus intentus est.</q>
</p>

<p>
E. G. Robinson: <q>The numbers of the Bible are characteristic of a semi-barbarous
age. The writers took care to guess enough. The tendency of such an age is always
to exaggerate.</q> Two Formosan savages divide five pieces between them by taking two
apiece and throwing one away. The lowest tribes can count only with the fingers of
their hands; when they use their toes as well, it marks an advance in civilization. To
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
the modern child a hundred is just as great a number as a million. So the early Scriptures
seem to use numbers with a childlike ignorance as to their meaning. Hundreds
of thousands can be substituted for tens of thousands, and the substitution seems
only a proper tribute to the dignity of the subject. Gore, in Lux Mundi, 353&mdash;<q>This
was not conscious perversion, but unconscious idealizing of history, the reading back
into past records of a ritual development which was really later. Inspiration excludes
conscious deception, but it appears to be quite consistent with this sort of idealizing;
always supposing that the result read back into the earlier history does represent the
real purpose of God and only anticipates the realization.</q>
</p>

<p>
There are some who contend that these historical imperfections are due to transcription
and that they did not belong to the original documents. Watts, New Apologetic, 71,
111, when asked what is gained by contending for infallible original autographs if they
have been since corrupted, replies: <q>Just what we gain by contending for the original
perfection of human nature, though man has since corrupted it. We must believe
God's own testimony about his own work. God may permit others to do what, as a
holy righteous God, he cannot do himself.</q> When the objector declares it a matter of
little consequence whether a pair of trousers were or were not originally perfect, so
long as they are badly rent just now, Watts replies: <q>The tailor who made them
would probably prefer to have it understood that the trousers did not leave his shop in
their present forlorn condition. God drops no stitches and sends out no imperfect
work.</q> Watts however seems dominated by an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> theory of inspiration, which
blinds him to the actual facts of the Bible.
</p>

<p>
Evans, Bib. Scholarship and Inspiration, 40&mdash;<q>Does the <emph>present</emph> error destroy the
inspiration of the Bible as we have it? No. Then why should the <emph>original</emph> error destroy
the inspiration of the Bible, as it was first given? There are spots on yonder sun; do
they stop its being the sun? Why, the sun is all the more a sun for the spots. So the
Bible.</q> Inspiration seems to have permitted the gathering of such material as was at
hand, very much as a modern editor might construct his account of an army movement
from the reports of a number of observers; or as a modern historian might combine
the records of a past age with all their imperfections of detail. In the case of the
Scripture writers, however, we maintain that inspiration has permitted no sacrifice of
moral and religious truth in the completed Scripture, but has woven its historical
material together into an organic whole which teaches all the facts essential to the
knowledge of Christ and of salvation.
</p>

<p>
When we come to examine in detail what purport to be historical narratives, we
must be neither credulous nor sceptical, but simply candid and open-minded. With
regard for example to the great age of the Old Testament patriarchs, we are no more
warranted in rejecting the Scripture accounts upon the ground that life in later times
is so much shorter, than we are to reject the testimony of botanists as to trees of the
Sequoia family between four and five hundred feet high, or the testimony of geologists
as to Saurians a hundred feet long, upon the ground that the trees and reptiles
with which we are acquainted are so much smaller. Every species at its introduction
seems to exhibit the maximum of size and vitality. Weismann, Heredity, 6, 30&mdash;<q>Whales
live some hundreds of years; elephants two hundred&mdash;their gestation taking
two years. Giants prove that the plan upon which man is constructed can also be
carried out on a scale far larger than the normal one.</q> E. Ray Lankester, Adv. of
Science, 205-237, 286&mdash;agrees with Weismann in his general theory. Sir George Cornewall
Lewis long denied centenarism, but at last had to admit it.
</p>

<p>
Charles Dudley Warner, in Harper's Magazine, Jan. 1895, gives instances of men 137,
140, and 192 years old. The German Haller asserts that <q>the ultimate limit of human
life does not exceed two centuries: to fix the exact number of years is exceedingly
difficult.</q> J. Norman Lockyer, in Nature, regards the years of the patriarchs as lunar
years. In Egypt, the sun being used, the unit of time was a year; but in Chaldea, the
unit of time was a month, for the reason that the standard of time was the moon.
Divide the numbers by twelve, and the lives of the patriarchs come out very much the
same length with lives at the present day. We may ask, however, how this theory
would work in shortening the lives between Noah and Moses. On the genealogies in
Matthew and Luke, see Lord Harvey, Genealogies of our Lord, and his art, in Smith's
Bible Dictionary; <hi rend='italic'>per contra</hi>, see Andrews, Life of Christ, 55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On Quirinius and the
enrollment for taxation (<emph>Luke 2:2</emph>), see Pres. Woolsey, in New Englander, 1869. On the
general subject, see Rawlinson, Historical Evidences, and essay in Modern Scepticism,
published by Christian Evidence Society, 1:265; Crooker, New Bible and New Uses,
102-126.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. Errors in Morality.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) What are charged as such are sometimes evil acts and words of good
men&mdash;words and acts not sanctioned by God. These are narrated by the
inspired writers as simple matter of history, and subsequent results, or the
story itself, is left to point the moral of the tale.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Instances of this sort are Noah's drunkenness (<emph>Gen. 9:20-27</emph>); Lot's incest (<emph>Gen. 19:30-38</emph>);
Jacob's falsehood (<emph>Gen. 27:19-24</emph>); David's adultery (<emph>2 Sam. 11:1-4</emph>); Peter's denial (<emph>Mat. 26:69-75</emph>).
See Lee, Inspiration, 265, note. Esther's vindictiveness is not commended, nor
are the characters of the Book of Esther said to have acted in obedience to a divine
command. Crane, Religion of To-morrow, 241&mdash;<q>In law and psalm and prophecy we
behold the influence of Jehovah working as leaven among a primitive and barbarous
people. Contemplating the Old Scriptures in this light, they become luminous with
divinity, and we are furnished with the principle by which to discriminate between the
divine and the human in the book. Particularly in David do we see a rugged, half-civilized,
kingly man, full of gross errors, fleshly and impetuous, yet permeated with a
divine Spirit that lifts him, struggling, weeping, and warring, up to some of the loftiest
conceptions of Deity which the mind of man has conceived. As an angelic being,
David is a caricature; as a man of God, as an example of God moving upon and raising
up a most human man, he is a splendid example. The proof that the church is of God,
is not its impeccability, but its progress.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Where evil acts appear at first sight to be sanctioned, it is frequently
some right intent or accompanying virtue, rather than the act itself, upon
which commendation is bestowed.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
As Rehab's faith, not her duplicity (<emph>Josh. 2:1-24</emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Heb. 11:31</emph> and <emph>James 2:25</emph>); Jael's
patriotism, not her treachery (<emph>Judges 4:17-22</emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>5:24</emph>). Or did they cast in their lot
with Israel and use the common stratagems of war (see next paragraph)? Herder:
<q>The limitations of the pupil are also limitations of the teacher.</q> While Dean Stanley
praises Solomon for tolerating idolatry, James Martineau, Study, 2:137, remarks: <q>It
would be a ridiculous pedantry to apply the Protestant pleas of private judgment to
such communities as ancient Egypt and Assyria.... It is the survival of coercion,
after conscience has been born to supersede it, that shocks and revolts us in persecution.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Certain commands and deeds are sanctioned as relatively just&mdash;expressions
of justice such as the age could comprehend, and are to be
judged as parts of a progressively unfolding system of morality whose key
and culmination we have in Jesus Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Ex. 20:25&mdash;<q>I gave them statutes that were not good</q></emph>&mdash;as Moses' permission of divorce and
retaliation (<emph>Deut. 24:1</emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Mat. 5:31, 32; 19:7-9</emph>; <emph>Ex. 21:24</emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Mat. 5:38, 39</emph>). Compare Elijah's
calling down fire from heaven (<emph>2 K. 1:10-12</emph>) with Jesus' refusal to do the same, and
his intimation that the spirit of Elijah was not the spirit of Christ (<emph>Luke 9:52-56</emph>); <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi>
Mattheson, Moments on the Mount, 253-255, on <emph>Mat. 17:8&mdash;<q>Jesus only</q></emph>: <q>The strength
of Elias paled before him. To shed the blood of enemies requires less strength than to
shed one's own blood, and to conquer by fire is easier than to conquer by love.</q> Hovey:
<q>In divine revelation, it is first starlight, then dawn, finally day.</q> George Washington
once gave directions for the transportation to the West Indies and the sale there of
a refractory negro who had given him trouble. This was not at variance with the
best morality of his time, but it would not suit the improved ethical standards of today.
The use of force rather than moral suasion is sometimes needed by children and
by barbarians. We may illustrate by the Sunday School scholar's unruliness which
was cured by his classmates during the week. <q>What did you say to him?</q> asked the
teacher. <q>We didn't say nothing; we just punched his head for him.</q> This was Old
Testament righteousness. The appeal in the O. T. to the hope of earthly rewards was
suitable to a stage of development not yet instructed as to heaven and hell by the coming
and work of Christ; compare <emph>Ex. 20:12</emph> with <emph>Mat. 5:10; 25:46</emph>. The Old Testament
aimed to fix in the mind of a selected people the idea of the unity and holiness of God;
in order to exterminate idolatry, much other teaching was postponed. See Peabody,
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
Religion of Nature, 45; Mozley, Ruling Ideas of Early Ages; Green, in Presb. Quar.,
April, 1877:221-252; McIlvaine, Wisdom of Holy Scripture, 328-368; Brit. and For.
Evang. Rev., Jan. 1878:1-32; Martineau, Study, 2:137.
</p>

<p>
When therefore we find in the inspired song of Deborah, the prophetess (<emph>Judges 5:30</emph>),
an allusion to the common spoils of war&mdash;<emph><q>a damsel, two damsels to every man</q></emph> or in <emph>Prov. 31:6,
7&mdash;<q>Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto the bitter in soul. Let him drink, and
forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more</q></emph>&mdash;we do not need to maintain that these passages
furnish standards for our modern conduct. Dr. Fisher calls the latter <q>the worst
advice to a person in affliction, or dispirited by the loss of property.</q> They mark past
stages in God's providential leading of mankind. A higher stage indeed is already intimated
in <emph>Prov. 31:4&mdash;<q>it is not for kings to drink wine, Nor for princes to say, Where is strong drink?</q></emph> We
see that God could use very imperfect instruments and could inspire very imperfect
men. Many things were permitted for men's <emph><q>hardness of heart</q> (Mat. 19:8)</emph>. The Sermon
on the Mount is a great advance on the law of Moses (<emph>Mat. 5:21&mdash;<q>Ye have heard that it was said
to them of old time</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> 22&mdash;<emph><q>But I say unto you</q></emph>).
</p>

<p>
Robert G. Ingersoll would have lost his stock in trade if Christians had generally recognized
that revelation is gradual, and is completed only in Christ. This gradualness
of revelation is conceded in the common phrase: <q>the new dispensation.</q> Abraham
Lincoln showed his wisdom by never going far ahead of the common sense of the people.
God similarly adapted his legislation to the capacities of each successive age. The
command to Abraham to sacrifice his son (<emph>Gen. 22:1-19</emph>) was a proper test of Abraham's
faith in a day when human sacrifice violated no common ethical standard because the
Hebrew, like the Roman, <q>patria potestas</q> did not regard the child as having a separate
individuality, but included the child in the parent and made the child equally responsible
for the parent's sin. But that very command was given <emph>only</emph> as a test of faith, and
with the intent to make the intended obedience the occasion of revealing God's provision
of a substitute and so of doing away with human sacrifice for all future time.
We may well imitate the gradualness of divine revelation in our treatment of dancing
and of the liquor traffic.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) God's righteous sovereignty affords the key to other events. He has
the right to do what he will with his own, and to punish the transgressor
when and where he will; and he may justly make men the foretellers or
executors of his purposes.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Foretellers, as in the imprecatory Psalms (<emph>137:9</emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Is. 13:16-18</emph> and <emph>Jer. 50:16, 29</emph>);
executors, as in the destruction of the Canaanites (<emph>Deut. 7:2, 16</emph>). In the former case the
Psalm was not the ebullition of personal anger, but the expression of judicial indignation
against the enemies of God. We must distinguish the substance from the form.
The substance was the denunciation of God's righteous judgments; the form was
taken from the ordinary customs of war in the Psalmist's time. See Park, in Bib. Sac.,
1862:165; Cowles, Com. on Ps. 137; Perowne on Psalms, Introd., 61; Presb. and Ref.
Rev., 1897:490-505; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>2 Tim. 4:14&mdash;<q>the Lord will render to him according to his works</q></emph>&mdash;a prophecy,
not a curse, ἀποδώσει, not ἀποδώη, as in A. V. In the latter case, an exterminating
war was only the benevolent surgery that amputated the putrid limb, and so saved the
religious life of the Hebrew nation and of the after-world. See Dr. Thomas Arnold,
Essay on the Right Interpretation of Scripture; Fisher, Beginnings of Christianity,
11-24.
</p>

<p>
Another interpretation of these events has been proposed, which would make them
illustrations of the principle indicated in (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) above: E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology,
45&mdash;<q>It was not the imprecations of the Psalm that were inspired of God, but his
purposes and ideas of which these were by the times the necessary vehicle; just as the
adultery of David was not by divine command, though through it the purpose of God
as to Christ's descent was accomplished.</q> John Watson (Ian Maclaren), Cure of Souls,
143&mdash;<q>When the massacre of the Canaanites and certain proceedings of David are flung
in the face of Christians, it is no longer necessary to fall back on evasions or special
pleading. It can now be frankly admitted that, from our standpoint in this year of
grace, such deeds were atrocious, and that they never could have been according to the
mind of God, but that they must be judged by their date, and considered the defects of
elementary moral processes. The Bible is vindicated, because it is, on the whole, a
steady ascent, and because it culminates in Christ.</q>
</p>

<p>
Lyman Abbott, Theology of an Evolutionist, 56&mdash;<q>Abraham mistook the voice of
conscience, calling on him to consecrate his only son to God, and interpreted it as a
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
command to slay his son as a burnt offering. Israel misinterpreted his righteous indignation
at the cruel and lustful rites of the Canaanitish religion as a divine summons to
destroy the worship by putting the worshipers to death; a people undeveloped in moral
judgment could not distinguish between formal regulations respecting camp-life and
eternal principles of righteousness, such as, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself,
but embodied them in the same code, and seemed to regard them as of equal authority.</q>
Wilkinson, Epic of Paul, 281&mdash;<q>If so be such man, so placed ... did in some part
That utterance make his own, profaning it, To be his vehicle for sense not meant By
the august supreme inspiring Will</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, putting some of his own sinful anger into
God's calm predictions of judgment. Compare the stern last words of <emph><q>Zechariah, the son of
Jehoiada, the priest</q></emph> when stoned to death in the temple court: <emph><q>Jehovah look upon it and require it</q>
(2 Chron. 24:20-22)</emph>, with the last words of Jesus: <emph><q>Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do</q>
(Luke 23:34)</emph> and of Stephen: <emph><q>Lord, lay not this sin to their charge</q> (Acts 7:60)</emph>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) Other apparent immoralities are due to unwarranted interpretations.
Symbol is sometimes taken for literal fact; the language of irony is understood
as sober affirmation; the glow and freedom of Oriental description
are judged by the unimpassioned style of Western literature; appeal to
lower motives is taken to exclude, instead of preparing for, the higher.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In <emph>Hosea 1:2, 3</emph>, the command to the prophet to marry a harlot was probably received
and executed in vision, and was intended only as symbolic: compare <emph>Jer. 25:15-18&mdash;<q>Take
this cup ... and cause all the nations ... to drink.</q></emph> Literal obedience would have made the
prophet contemptible to those whom he would instruct, and would require so long a
time as to weaken, if not destroy, the designed effect; see Ann. Par. Bible, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>. In
<emph>2 K. 6:19</emph>, Elisha's deception, so called, was probably only ironical and benevolent; the
enemy dared not resist, because they were completely in his power. In the <emph>Song of Solomon</emph>,
we have, as Jewish writers have always held, a highly-wrought dramatic description of
the union between Jehovah and his people, which we must judge by Eastern and not by
Western literary standards.
</p>

<p>
Francis W. Newman, in his Phases of Faith, accused even the New Testament of
presenting low motives for human obedience. It is true that all right motives are
appealed to, and some of these motives are of a higher sort than are others. Hope of
heaven and fear of hell are not the highest motives, but they may be employed as
preliminary incitements to action, even though only love for God and for holiness will
ensure salvation. Such motives are urged both by Christ and by his apostles: <emph>Mat. 6:20&mdash;<q>lay
up for yourselves treasures in heaven</q></emph>; <emph>10:28&mdash;<q>fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell</q></emph>;
<emph>Jude 23&mdash;<q>some save with fear, snatching them out of the fire.</q></emph> In this respect the N. T. does not
differ from the O. T. George Adam Smith has pointed out that the royalists got their
texts, <emph><q>the powers that be</q> (Rom. 13:1)</emph> and <emph><q>the king as supreme</q> (1 Pet. 2:13)</emph>, from the N. T.,
while the O. T. furnished texts for the defenders of liberty. While the O. T. deals with
<emph>national</emph> life, and the discharge of social and political functions, the N. T. deals in the
main with <emph>individuals</emph> and with their relations to God. On the whole subject, see
Hessey, Moral Difficulties of the Bible; Jellett, Moral Difficulties of the O. T.; Faith
and Free Thought (Lect. by Christ. Ev. Soc.), 2:173; Rogers, Eclipse of Faith; Butler,
Analogy, part ii, chap. iii; Orr, Problem of the O. T., 465-483.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>4. Errors of Reasoning.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) What are charged as such are generally to be explained as valid
argument expressed in highly condensed form. The appearance of error
may be due to the suppression of one or more links in the reasoning.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In <emph>Mat. 22:32</emph>, Christ's argument for the resurrection, drawn from the fact that God is
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, is perfectly and obviously valid, the moment
we put in the suppressed premise that the living relation to God which is here implied
cannot properly be conceived as something merely spiritual, but necessarily requires a
new and restored life of the body. If God is the God of the living, then Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob shall rise from the dead. See more full exposition, under Eschatology.
Some of the Scripture arguments are enthymemes, and an enthymeme, according to
Arbuthnot and Pope, is <q>a syllogism in which the major is married to the minnor, and
the marriage is kept secret.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Where we cannot see the propriety of the conclusions drawn from
given premises, there is greater reason to attribute our failure to ignorance
of divine logic on our part, than to accommodation or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad hominem</foreign> arguments
on the part of the Scripture writers.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
By divine logic we mean simply a logic whose elements and processes are correct,
though not understood by us. In <emph>Heb. 7:9, 10</emph> (Levi's paying tithes in Abraham), there is
probably a recognition of the organic unity of the family, which in miniature illustrates
the organic unity of the race. In <emph>Gal. 3:20&mdash;<q>a mediator is not a mediator of one; but God is
one</q></emph>&mdash;the law, with its two contracting parties, is contrasted with the promise, which
proceeds from the sole fiat of God and is therefore unchangeable. Paul's argument
here rests on Christ's divinity as its foundation&mdash;otherwise Christ would have been a
mediator in the same sense in which Moses was a mediator (see Lightfoot, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>). In
<emph>Gal. 4:21-31</emph>, Hagar and Ishmael on the one hand, and Sarah and Isaac on the other, illustrate
the exclusion of the bondmen of the law from the privileges of the spiritual seed
of Abraham. Abraham's two wives, and the two classes of people in the two sons,
represent the two covenants (so Calvin). In <emph>John 10:34&mdash;<q>I said, Ye are gods,</q></emph> the implication
is that Judaism was not a system of mere monotheism, but of theism tending to
theanthropism, a real union of God and man (Westcott, Bib. Com., <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>). Godet
well remarks that he who doubts Paul's logic will do well first to suspect his own.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The adoption of Jewish methods of reasoning, where it could be
proved, would not indicate error on the part of the Scripture writers, but
rather an inspired sanction of the method as applied to that particular case.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In <emph>Gal. 3:16&mdash;<q>He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.</q></emph> Here
it is intimated that the very form of the expression in <emph>Gen. 22:18</emph>, which denotes unity,
was selected by the Holy Spirit as significant of that one person, Christ, who was the
true seed of Abraham and in whom all nations were to be blessed. Argument from the
form of a single word is in this case correct, although the Rabbins often made more of
single words than the Holy Spirit ever intended. Watts, New Apologetic, 69&mdash;<q>F. W.
Farrar asserts that the plural of the Hebrew or Greek terms for <q>seed</q> is never used
by Hebrew or Greek writers as a designation of human offspring. But see Sophocles,
Œdipus at Colonus, 599, 600&mdash;γῆς ἔμῆς ἀπηλάθην πρὸς τῶν ἐμαυτοῦ σπερμάτων&mdash;<q>I was driven
away from my own country by my own offspring.</q></q> In <emph>1 Cor. 10:1-6&mdash;<q>and the rock was Christ</q></emph>&mdash;the
Rabbinic tradition that the smitten rock followed the Israelites in their wanderings
is declared to be only the absurd literalizing of a spiritual fact&mdash;the continual
presence of Christ, as preëxistent Logos, with his ancient people. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Row,
Rev. and Mod. Theories, 98-128.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) If it should appear however upon further investigation that Rabbinical
methods have been wrongly employed by the apostles in their argumentation,
we might still distinguish between the truth they are seeking
to convey and the arguments by which they support it. Inspiration may
conceivably make known the truth, yet leave the expression of the truth to
human dialectic as well as to human rhetoric.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Johnson, Quotations of the N. T. from the O. T., 137, 138&mdash;<q>In the utter absence of
all evidence to the contrary, we ought to suppose that the allegories of the N. T. are
like the allegories of literature in general, merely luminous embodiments of the truth....
If these allegories are not presented by their writers as evidences, they are none
the less precious, since they illuminate the truth otherwise evinced, and thus render it
at once clear to the apprehension and attractive to the taste.</q> If however the purpose
of the writers was to use these allegories for proof, we may still see shining
through the rifts of their traditional logic the truth which they were striving to set
forth. Inspiration may have put them in possession of this truth without altering their
ordinary scholastic methods of demonstration and expression. Horton, Inspiration,
108&mdash;<q>Discrepancies and illogical reasonings were but inequalities or cracks in the
mirrors, which did not materially distort or hide the Person</q> whose glory they sought
to reflect. Luther went even further than this when he said that a certain argument
in the epistle was <q>good enough for the Galatians.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>5. Errors in quoting or interpreting the Old Testament.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) What are charged as such are commonly interpretations of the
meaning of the original Scripture by the same Spirit who first inspired it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In <emph>Eph. 5:14, <q>arise from the dead, and Christ shall shine upon thee</q></emph> is an inspired interpretation of
<emph>Is. 60:1&mdash;<q>Arise, shine; for thy light is come.</q></emph> <emph>Ps. 68:18&mdash;<q>Thou hast received gifts among men</q></emph>&mdash;is quoted
in <emph>Eph. 4:8</emph> as <emph><q>gave gifts to men.</q></emph> The words in Hebrew are probably a concise expression
for <q>thou hast taken spoil which thou mayest distribute as gifts to men.</q> <emph>Eph. 4:8</emph>
agrees exactly with the sense, though not with the words, of the Psalm. In <emph>Heb. 11:21,
<q>Jacob ... worshiped, leaning upon the top of his staff</q></emph> (LXX); <emph>Gen. 47:31</emph> has <emph><q>bowed himself upon the
bed's head.</q></emph> The meaning is the same, for the staff of the chief and the spear of the warrior
were set at the bed's head. Jacob, too feeble to rise, prayed in his bed. Here Calvin
says that <q>the apostle does not hesitate to accommodate to his own purpose what
was commonly received,&mdash;they were not so scrupulous</q> as to details. Even Gordon,
Ministry of the Spirit, 177, speaks of <q>a reshaping of his own words by the Author of
them.</q> We prefer, with Calvin, to see in these quotations evidence that the sacred
writers were insistent upon the substance of the truth rather than upon the form, the
spirit rather than the letter.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Where an apparently false translation is quoted from the Septuagint,
the sanction of inspiration is given to it, as expressing a part at least of the
fulness of meaning contained in the divine original&mdash;a fulness of meaning
which two varying translations do not in some cases exhaust.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Ps. 4:4</emph>&mdash;Heb.: <emph><q>Tremble, and sin not</q></emph> (= no longer); LXX: <emph><q>Be ye angry, and sin not.</q> Eph. 4:26</emph>
quotes the LXX. The words may originally have been addressed to David's comrades,
exhorting them to keep their anger within bounds. Both translations together are
needed to bring out the meaning of the original. <emph>Ps. 40:6-8&mdash;<q>Mine ears hast thou opened</q></emph> is
translated in <emph>Heb. 10:5-7&mdash;<q>a body didst thou prepare for me.</q></emph> Here the Epistle quotes from the
LXX. But the Hebrew means literally: <emph><q>Mine ears hast thou bored</q></emph>&mdash;an allusion to the custom
of pinning a slave to the doorpost of his master by an awl driven through his ear,
in token of his complete subjection. The sense of the verse is therefore given in the
Epistle: <q>Thou hast made me thine in body and soul&mdash;lo, I come to do thy will.</q>
A. C. Kendrick: <q>David, just entering upon his kingdom after persecution, is a type of
Christ entering on his earthly mission. Hence David's words are put into the mouth
of Christ. For <q>ears,</q> the organs with which we hear and obey and which David conceived
to be hollowed out for him by God, the author of the Hebrews substitutes the
word <emph><q>body,</q></emph> as the <emph>general</emph> instrument of doing God's will</q> (Com. on <emph>Heb. 10:5-7</emph>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The freedom of these inspired interpretations, however, does not
warrant us in like freedom of interpretation in the case of other passages
whose meaning has not been authoritatively made known.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We have no reason to believe that the scarlet thread of Rahab (<emph>Josh. 2:18</emph>) was a
designed prefiguration of the blood of Christ, nor that the three measures of meal in
which the woman hid her leaven (<emph>Mat. 13:33</emph>) symbolized Shem, Ham and Japheth, the
three divisions of the human race. C. H. M., in his notes on the tabernacle in Exodus,
tells us that <q>the loops of blue = heavenly grace; the taches of gold = the divine
energy of Christ; the rams' skins dyed red = Christ's consecration and devotedness;
the badgers' skins = his holy vigilance against temptation</q>! The tabernacle was
indeed a type of Christ (<emph>John 1:14</emph>&mdash;ἐσκήνωσεν. <emph>2:19, 21&mdash;<q>in three days I will raise it up ... but
he spake of the temple of his body</q></emph>); yet it does not follow that every detail of the structure
was significant. So each parable teaches some one main lesson,&mdash;the particulars may
be mere drapery; and while we may use the parables for illustration, we should never
ascribe divine authority to our private impressions of their meaning.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Mat. 25:1-13</emph>&mdash;the parable of the five wise and the five foolish virgins&mdash;has been made
to teach that the number of the saved precisely equals the number of the lost. Augustine
defended persecution from the words in <emph>Luke 14:23&mdash;<q>constrain them to come in.</q></emph> The
Inquisition was justified by <emph>Mat. 13:30&mdash;<q>bind them in bundles to burn them.</q></emph> Innocent III
denied the Scriptures to the laity, quoting <emph>Heb. 12:20&mdash;<q>If even a beast touch the mountain, it shall
be stoned.</q></emph> A Plymouth Brother held that he would be safe on an evangelizing journey
because he read in <emph>John 19:36&mdash;<q>A bone of him shall not be broken.</q></emph> <emph>Mat. 17:8&mdash;<q>they saw no one, save Jesus
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
only</q></emph>&mdash;has been held to mean that we should trust only Jesus. The Epistle of Barnabas
discovered in Abraham's 318 servants a prediction of the crucified Jesus, and others
have seen in Abraham's three days' journey to Mount Moriah the three stages in the
development of the soul. Clement of Alexandria finds the four natural elements in
the four colors of the Jewish Tabernacle. All this is to make a parable <q>run on all
fours.</q> While we call a hero a lion, we do not need to find in the man something to
correspond to the lion's mane and claws. See Toy, Quotations in the N. T.; Franklin
Johnson, Quotations of the N. T. from the O. T.; Crooker, The New Bible and its New
Uses, 126-136.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) While we do not grant that the New Testament writers in any
proper sense misquoted or misinterpreted the Old Testament, we do not
regard absolute correctness in these respects as essential to their inspiration.
The inspiring Spirit may have communicated truth, and may have
secured in the Scriptures as a whole a record of that truth sufficient for
men's moral and religious needs, without imparting perfect gifts of scholarship
or exegesis.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In answer to Toy, Quotations in the N. T., who takes a generally unfavorable
view of the correctness of the N. T. writers, Johnson, Quotations of the N. T. from the
O. T., maintains their correctness. On pages x, xi, of his Introduction, Johnson
remarks: <q>I think it just to regard the writers of the Bible as the creators of a great
literature, and to judge and interpret them by the laws of literature. They have produced
all the chief forms of literature, as history, biography, anecdote, proverb, oratory,
allegory, poetry, fiction. They have needed therefore all the resources of human
speech, its sobriety and scientific precision on one page, its rainbow hues of fancy and
imagination on another, its fires of passion on yet another. They could not have
moved and guided men in the best manner had they denied themselves the utmost
force and freedom of language; had they refused to employ its wide range of expressions,
whether exact or poetic; had they not borrowed without stint its many forms
of reason, of terror, of rapture, of hope, of joy, of peace. So also, they have needed the
usual freedom of literary allusion and citation, in order to commend the gospel to the
judgment, the tastes, and the feelings of their readers.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>6. Errors in Prophecy.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) What are charged as such may frequently be explained by remembering
that much of prophecy is yet unfulfilled.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It is sometimes taken for granted that the book of Revelation, for example, refers
entirely to events already past. Moses Stuart, in his Commentary, and Warren's Parousia,
represent this preterist interpretation. Thus judged, however, many of the predictions
of the book might seem to have failed.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The personal surmises of the prophets as to the meaning of the
prophecies they recorded may have been incorrect, while yet the prophecies
themselves are inspired.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In <emph>1 Pet. 1:10, 11</emph>, the apostle declares that the prophets searched <emph><q>what time or what manner
of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did point unto, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ and
the glories that should follow them.</q></emph> So Paul, although he does not announce it as certain,
seems to have had some hope that he might live to witness Christ's second coming.
See <emph>2 Cor. 5:4&mdash;<q>not for that we would be unclothed, but that we would be clothed upon</q></emph> (ἐπενδύσασθαι&mdash;put
on the spiritual body, as over the present one, without the intervention of death);
<emph>1 Thess. 4:15, 17&mdash;<q>we that are alive, that are left unto the coming of the Lord.</q></emph> So <emph>Mat. 2:15</emph> quotes from
<emph>Hosea 11:1&mdash;<q>Out of Egypt did I call my son,</q></emph> and applies the prophecy to Christ, although Hosea
was doubtless thinking only of the exodus of the people of Israel.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The prophet's earlier utterances are not to be severed from the later
utterances which elucidate them, nor from the whole revelation of which
they form a part. It is unjust to forbid the prophet to explain his own
meaning.
</p>

<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>2 Thessalonians</emph> was written expressly to correct wrong inferences as to the apostle's teaching
drawn from his peculiar mode of speaking in the first epistle. In <emph>2 Thess. 2:2-5</emph> he
removes the impression <emph><q>that the day of the Lord is now present</q></emph> or <emph><q>just at hand</q></emph>; declares that <emph><q>it
will not be, except the falling away come first, and the man of sin be revealed</q></emph>; reminds the Thessalonians:
<emph><q>when I was yet with you, I told you these things.</q></emph> Yet still, in <emph>verse 1</emph>, he speaks of <emph><q>the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering together unto him.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
These passages, taken together, show: (1) that the two epistles are one in their teaching;
(2) that in neither epistle is there any prediction of the immediate coming of the
Lord; (3) that in the second epistle great events are foretold as intervening before
that coming; (4) that while Paul never taught that Christ would come during his own
lifetime, he hoped at least during the earlier part of his life that it might be so&mdash;a hope
that seems to have been dissipated in his later years. (See <emph>2 Tim. 4:6&mdash;<q>I am already being offered,
and the time of my departure is come.</q></emph>) We must remember, however, that there was a <emph><q>coming
of the Lord</q></emph> in the destruction of Jerusalem within three or four years of Paul's death.
Henry Van Dyke: <q>The point of Paul's teaching in <emph>1</emph> and <emph>2 Thess.</emph> is not that Christ is
coming to-morrow, but that he is surely coming.</q> The absence of perspective in
prophecy may explain Paul's not at first defining the precise time of the end, and so
leaving it to be misunderstood.
</p>

<p>
The second Epistle to the Thessalonians, therefore, only makes more plain the meaning
of the first, and adds new items of prediction. It is important to recognize in Paul's
epistles a progress in prophecy, in doctrine, in church polity. The full statement of the
truth was gradually drawn out, under the influence of the Spirit, upon occasion of
successive outward demands and inward experiences. Much is to be learned by studying
the chronological order of Paul's epistles, as well as of the other N. T. books. For
evidence of similar progress in the epistles of Peter, compare <emph>1 Pet. 4:7</emph> with <emph>2 Pet. 3:4</emph> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The character of prophecy as a rough general sketch of the future,
in highly figurative language, and without historical perspective, renders
it peculiarly probable that what at first sight seem to be errors are due
to a misinterpretation on our part, which confounds the drapery with the
substance, or applies its language to events to which it had no reference.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>James 5:9</emph> and <emph>Phil. 4:5</emph> are instances of that large prophetic speech which regards the
distant future as near at hand, because so certain to the faith and hope of the church.
Sanday, Inspiration, 376-378&mdash;<q>No doubt the Christians of the Apostolic age did live in
immediate expectation of the Second Coming, and that expectation culminated at the
crisis in which the Apocalypse was written. In the Apocalypse, as in every predictive
prophecy, there is a double element, one part derived from the circumstances of the
present and another pointing forwards to the future.... All these things, in an
exact and literal sense have fallen through with the postponement of that great event
in which they centre. From the first they were but meant as the imaginative pictorial
and symbolical clothing of that event. What measure of real fulfilment the Apocalypse
may yet be destined to receive we cannot tell. But in predictive prophecy,
even when most closely verified, the essence lies less in the prediction than in the eternal
laws of moral and religious truth which the fact predicted reveals or exemplifies.</q>
Thus we recognize both the divinity and the freedom of prophecy, and reject the
rationalistic theory which would relate the fall of the Beaconsfield government in
Matthew's way: <q>That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Cromwell, saying:
<q>Get you gone, and make room for honest men!</q></q> See the more full statement of the
nature of prophecy, on pages 132-141. Also Bernard, Progress of Doctrine in the N. T.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>7. Certain books unworthy of a place in inspired Scripture.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) This charge may be shown, in each single case, to rest upon a misapprehension
of the aim and method of the book, and its connection with
the remainder of the Bible, together with a narrowness of nature or of
doctrinal view, which prevents the critic from appreciating the wants of the
peculiar class of men to which the book is especially serviceable.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Luther called <emph>James</emph> <q>a right strawy epistle.</q> His constant pondering of the doctrine
of justification by faith alone made it difficult for him to grasp the complementary
truth that we are justified only by such faith as brings forth good works, or to perceive
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
the essential agreement of James and Paul. Prof. R. E. Thompson, in S. S. Times,
Dec. 3,1898:803, 804&mdash;<q>Luther refused canonical authority to books not actually written
by apostles or composed (as Mark and Luke) under their direction. So he rejected
from the rank of canonical authority Hebrews, James, Jude, 2 Peter, Revelation.
Even Calvin doubted the Petrine authorship of 2 Peter, excluded the book of Revelation
from the Scripture on which he wrote Commentaries, and also thus ignored 2 and 3
John.</q> G. P. Fisher in S. S. Times, Aug. 29, 1891&mdash;<q>Luther, in his preface to the N. T.
(Edition of 1522), gives a list of what he considers as the principal books of the N. T.
These are John's Gospel and First Epistle, Paul's Epistles, especially Romans and Galatians,
and Peter's First Epistle. Then he adds that <q>St. James' Epistle is a right
strawy Epistle <emph>compared with them</emph></q>&mdash;<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>ein recht strohern Epistel gegen sie,</foreign></q> thus characterizing
it not absolutely but only relatively.</q> Zwingle even said of the Apocalypse:
<q>It is not a Biblical book.</q> So Thomas Arnold, with his exaggerated love for historical
accuracy and definite outline, found the Oriental imagery and sweeping visions of the
book of Revelation so bizarre and distasteful that he doubted their divine authority.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The testimony of church history and general Christian experience
to the profitableness and divinity of the disputed books is of greater weight
than the personal impressions of the few who criticize them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Instance the testimonies of the ages of persecution to the worth of the prophecies,
which assure God's people that his cause shall surely triumph. Denney, Studies in Theology,
226&mdash;<q>It is at least as likely that the individual should be insensible to the divine
message in a book, as that the church should have judged it to contain such a message
if it did not do so.</q> Milton, Areopagitica: <q>The Bible brings in holiest men passionately
murmuring against Providence through all the arguments of Epicurus.</q> Bruce,
Apologetics, 329&mdash;<q>O. T. religion was querulous, vindictive, philolevitical, hostile
toward foreigners, morbidly self-conscious, and tending to self-righteousness. Ecclesiastes
shows us how we ought <emph>not</emph> to feel. To go about crying <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vanitas!</foreign> is to miss the
lesson it was meant to teach, namely, that the Old Covenant was vanity&mdash;proved to be
vanity by allowing a son of the Covenant to get into so despairing a mood.</q> Chadwick
says that Ecclesiastes got into the Canon only after it had received an orthodox postscript.
</p>

<p>
Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 1:193&mdash;<q>Slavish fear and self-righteous reckoning with
God are the unlovely features of this Jewish religion of law to which the ethical idealism
of the prophets had degenerated, and these traits strike us most visibly in Pharsiaism....
It was this side of the O. T. religion to which Christianity took a critical and
destroying attitude, while it revealed a new and higher knowledge of God. For, says
Paul, <emph><q>ye received not the spirit of bondage again unto fear; but ye received the spirit of adoption</q> (Rom. 8:15)</emph>.
In unity with God man does not lose his soul but preserves it. God not only commands
but gives.</q> Ian Maclaren (John Watson), Cure of Souls, 144&mdash;<q>When the book of
Ecclesiastes is referred to the days of the third century B. C., then its note is caught,
and any man who has been wronged and embittered by political tyranny and social
corruption has his bitter cry included in the book of God.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Such testimony can be adduced in favor of the value of each one of
the books to which exception is taken, such as Esther, Job, Song of Solomon,
Ecclesiastes, Jonah, James, Revelation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Esther is the book, next to the Pentateuch, held in highest reverence by the Jews.
<q>Job was the discoverer of infinity, and the first to see the bearing of infinity on
righteousness. It was the return of religion to nature. Job heard the voice beyond
the Sinai-voice</q> (Shadow-Cross, 89). Inge, Christian Mysticism, 43&mdash;<q>As to the Song
of Solomon, its influence upon Christian Mysticism has been simply deplorable. A
graceful romance in honor of true love has been distorted into a precedent and sanction
for giving way to hysterical emotions in which sexual imagery has been freely
used to symbolize the relation between the soul and its Lord.</q> Chadwick says that
the Song of Solomon got into the Canon only after it had received an allegorical interpretation.
Gladden, Seven Puzzling Bible Books, 165, thinks it impossible that <q>the
addition of one more inmate to the harem of that royal rake, King Solomon, should
have been made the type of the spiritual affection between Christ and his church.
Instead of this, the book is a glorification of pure love. The Shulamite, transported to
the court of Solomon, remains faithful to her shepherd lover, and is restored to him.</q>
</p>

<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>

<p>
Bruce, Apologetics, 321&mdash;<q>The Song of Solomon, literally interpreted as a story of
true love, proof against the blandishments of the royal harem, is rightfully in the
Canon as a buttress to the true religion; for whatever made for purity in the relations
of the sexes made for the worship of Jehovah&mdash;Baal worship and impurity being
closely associated.</q> Rutherford, McCheyne, and Spurgeon have taken more texts
from the Song of Solomon than from any other portion of Scripture of like extent.
Charles G. Finney, Autobiography, 378&mdash;<q>At this time it seemed as if my soul was
wedded to Christ in a sense which I never had any thought or conception of before.
The language of the Song of Solomon was as natural to me as my breath. I thought I
could understand well the state he was in when he wrote that Song, and concluded then,
as I have ever thought since, that that Song was written by him after he had been
reclaimed from his great backsliding. I not only had all the fulness of my first love,
but a vast accession to it. Indeed, the Lord lifted me up so much above anything that
I had experienced before, and taught me so much of the meaning of the Bible, of
Christ's relations and power and willingness, that I found myself saying to him: I had
not known or conceived that any such thing was true.</q> On Jonah, see R. W. Dale, in
Expositor, July, 1892, advocating the non-historical and allegorical character of the
book. Bib. Sac., 10:737-764&mdash;<q>Jonah represents the nation of Israel as emerging
through a miracle from the exile, in order to carry out its mission to the world at
large. It teaches that God is the God of the whole earth; that the Ninevites as well as
the Israelites are dear to him; that his threatenings of penalty are conditional.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>8. Portions of the Scripture books written by others than the persons
to whom they are ascribed.</head>

<p>
The objection rests upon a misunderstanding of the nature and object of
inspiration. It may be removed by considering that
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) In the case of books made up from preëxisting documents, inspiration
simply preserved the compilers of them from selecting inadequate or
improper material. The fact of such compilation does not impugn their
value as records of a divine revelation, since these books supplement each
other's deficiencies and together are sufficient for man's religious needs.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Luke distinctly informs us that he secured the materials for his gospel from the
reports of others who were eye-witnesses of the events he recorded (<emph>Luke 1:1-4</emph>). The
book of Genesis bears marks of having incorporated documents of earlier times. The
account of creation which begins with <emph>Gen. 2:4</emph> is evidently written by a different hand
from that which penned <emph>1:1-31</emph> and <emph>2:1-3</emph>. Instances of the same sort may be found in
the books of Chronicles. In like manner, Marshall's Life of Washington incorporates
documents by other writers. By thus incorporating them, Marshall vouches for their
truth. See Bible Com., 1:2, 22.
</p>

<p>
Dorner, Hist. Prot. Theology, 1:243&mdash;<q>Luther ascribes to faith critical authority with
reference to the Canon. He denies the canonicity of James, without regarding it as
spurious. So of Hebrews and Revelation, though later, in 1545, he passed a more favorable
judgment upon the latter. He even says of a proof adduced by Paul in Galatians
that it is too weak to hold. He allows that in external matters not only Stephen but
even the sacred authors contain inaccuracies. The authority of the O. T. does not seem
to him invalidated by the admission that several of its writings have passed through
revising hands. What would it matter, he asks, if Moses did not write the Pentateuch?
The prophets studied Moses and one another. If they built in much wood, hay and
stubble along with the rest, still the foundation abides; the fire of the great day shall
consume the former; for in this manner do we treat the writings of Augustine and
others. Kings is far more to be believed than Chronicles. Ecclesiastes is forged and
cannot come from Solomon. Esther is not canonical. The church may have erred in
adopting a book into the Canon. Faith first requires proof. Hence he ejects the Apocryphal
books of the O. T. from the Canon. So some parts of the N. T. receive only a
secondary, deuterocanonical position. There is a difference between the word of God
and the holy Scriptures, not merely in reference to the form, but also in reference to
the subject matter.</q>
</p>

<p>
H. P. Smith, Bib. Scholarship and Inspiration, 94&mdash;<q>The Editor of the Minor Prophets
united in one roll the prophetic fragments which were in circulation in his time.
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
Finding a fragment without an author's name he inserted it in the series. It would not
have been distinguished from the work of the author immediately preceding. So <emph>Zech.
9:1-4</emph> came to go under the name of Zechariah, and <emph>Is. 40-66</emph> under the name of Isaiah.
Reuss called these <q>anatomical studies.</q></q> On the authorship of the book of Daniel, see
W. C. Wilkinson, in Homiletical Review, March, 1902:208, and Oct. 1902:305; on Paul,
see Hom. Rev., June, 1902:501; on 110th Psalm, Hom. Rev., April, 1902:309.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) In the case of additions to Scripture books by later writers, it is
reasonable to suppose that the additions, as well as the originals, were made
by inspiration, and no essential truth is sacrificed by allowing the whole to
go under the name of the chief author.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Mark 16:9-20</emph> appears to have been added by a later hand (see English Revised Version).
The Eng. Rev. Vers. also brackets or segregates a part of <emph>verse 3</emph> and the whole of <emph>verse 4</emph> in
<emph>John 5</emph> (the moving of the water by the angel), and the whole passage <emph>John 7:53-8:11</emph> (the
woman taken in adultery). Westcott and Hort regard the latter passage as an interpolation,
probably <q>Western</q> in its origin (so also <emph>Mark 16:9-20</emph>). Others regard it as authentic,
though not written by John. The closing chapter of Deuteronomy was apparently
added after Moses' death&mdash;perhaps by Joshua. If criticism should prove other
portions of the Pentateuch to have been composed after Moses' time, the inspiration
of the Pentateuch would not be invalidated, so long as Moses was its chief author
or even the original source and founder of its legislation (<emph>John 5:46&mdash;<q>he wrote of me</q></emph>).
Gore, in Lux Mundi, 355&mdash;<q>Deuteronomy may be a republication of the law, in the
spirit and power of Moses, and put dramatically into his mouth.</q>
</p>

<p>
At a spot near the Pool of Siloam, Manasseh is said to have ordered that Isaiah should
be sawn asunder with a wooden saw. The prophet is again sawn asunder by the recent
criticism. But his prophecy opens (<emph>Is. 1:1</emph>) with the statement that it was composed
during a period which covered the reigns of four kings&mdash;Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz and
Hezekiah&mdash;nearly forty years. In so long a time the style of a writer greatly changes.
<emph>Chapters 40-66</emph> may have been written in Isaiah's later age, after he had retired from public
life. Compare the change in the style of Zechariah, John and Paul, with that in
Thomas Carlyle and George William Curtis. On Isaiah, see Smyth, Prophecy a Preparation
for Christ; Bib. Sac., Apr. 1881:230-253; also July, 1881; Stanley, Jewish Ch., 2:646,
647; Nägelsbach, Int. to Lange's Isaiah.
</p>

<p>
For the view that there were two Isaiahs, see George Adam Smith, Com. on Isaiah,
2:1-25: Isaiah flourished B. C. 740-700. The last 27 chapters deal with the captivity
(598-538) and with Cyrus (550), whom they name. The book is not one continuous
prophecy, but a number of separate orations. Some of these claim to be Isaiah's own,
and have titles, such as <emph><q>The vision of Isaiah the son of Amos</q> (1:1)</emph>; <emph><q>The word that Isaiah the son of Amos
saw</q> (2:1)</emph>. But such titles describe only the individual prophecies they head. Other
portions of the book, on other subjects and in different styles, have no titles at all.
Chapters <emph>40-66</emph> do not claim to be his. There are nine citations in the N. T. from the disputed
chapters, but none by our Lord. None of these citations were given in answer
to the question: Did Isaiah write chapters <emph>44-66</emph>? Isaiah's name is mentioned only for the
sake of reference. Chapters <emph>44-66</emph> set forth the exile and captivity as already having
taken place. Israel is addressed as ready for deliverance. Cyrus is named as deliverer.
There is no grammar of the future like Jeremiah's. Cyrus is pointed out as proof that
<emph>former</emph> prophecies of deliverance are at last coming to pass. He is not presented as a
prediction, but as a proof that prediction is being fulfilled. The prophet could not
have referred the heathen to Cyrus as proof that prophecy had been fulfilled, had he
not been visible to them in all his weight of war. Babylon has still to fall before the
exiles can go free. But chapters <emph>40-66</emph> speak of the coming of Cyrus as past, and of the
fall of Babylon as yet to come. Why not use the prophetic perfect of both, if both
were yet future? Local color, language and thought are all consistent with exilic
authorship. All suits the exile, but all is foreign to the subjects and methods of Isaiah,
for example, the use of the terms <emph>righteous</emph> and <emph>righteousness</emph>. Calvin admits exilic
authorship (on <emph>Is. 55:3</emph>). The passage <emph>56:9-57</emph>, however, is an exception and is preëxilic.
<emph>40-48</emph> are certainly by one hand, and may be dated 555-538. 2nd Isaiah is not a unity,
but consists of a number of pieces written before, during, and after the exile, to comfort
the people of God.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It is unjust to deny to inspired Scripture the right exercised by
all historians of introducing certain documents and sayings as simply historical,
while their complete truthfulness is neither vouched for nor denied.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
An instance in point is the letter of Claudius Lysias in <emph>Acts 23:26-30</emph>&mdash;a letter which represents
his conduct in a more favorable light than the facts would justify&mdash;for he had
not learned that Paul was a Roman when he rescued him in the temple (<emph>Acts 21:31-33; 22:26-29</emph>).
An incorrect statement may be correctly reported. A set of pamphlets printed in
the time of the French Revolution might be made an appendix to some history of
France without implying that the historian vouched for their truth. The sacred historians
may similarly have been inspired to use only the material within their reach,
leaving their readers by comparison with other Scriptures to judge of its truthfulness
and value. This seems to have been the method adopted by the compiler of <emph>1</emph> and <emph>2
Chronicles</emph>. The moral and religious lessons of the history are patent, even though there
is inaccuracy in reporting some of the facts. So the assertions of the authors of the
Psalms cannot be taken for absolute truth. The authors were not sinless models for the
Christian,&mdash;only Christ is that. But the Psalms present us with a record of the actual
experience of believers in the past. It has its human weakness, but we can profit by
it, even though it expresses itself at times in imprecations. <emph>Jeremiah 20:7&mdash;<q>O lord, thou
hast deceived me</q></emph>&mdash;may possibly be thus explained.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>9. Sceptical or fictitious Narratives.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Descriptions of human experience may be embraced in Scripture,
not as models for imitation, but as illustrations of the doubts, struggles, and
needs of the soul. In these cases inspiration may vouch, not for the correctness
of the views expressed by those who thus describe their mental
history, but only for the correspondence of the description with actual fact,
and for its usefulness as indirectly teaching important moral lessons.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The book of Ecclesiastes, for example, is the record of the mental struggles of a soul
seeking satisfaction without God. If written by Solomon during the time of his religious
declension, or near the close of it, it would constitute a most valuable commentary
upon the inspired history. Yet it might be equally valuable, though composed by some
later writer under divine direction and inspiration. H. P. Smith, Bib. Scholarship and
Inspiration, 97&mdash;<q>To suppose Solomon the author of Ecclesiastes is like supposing
Spenser to have written In Memoriam.</q> Luther, Keil, Delitzsch, Ginsburg, Hengstenberg
all declare it to be a production of later times (330 B. C.). The book shows experience
of misgovernment. An earlier writer cannot write in the style of a later one,
though the later can imitate the earlier. The early Latin and Greek Fathers quoted
the Apocryphal Wisdom of Solomon as by Solomon; see Plumptre, Introd. to Ecclesiastes,
in Cambridge Bible. Gore, in Lux Mundi, 355&mdash;<q>Ecclesiastes, though like the
book of Wisdom purporting to be by Solomon, may be by another author.... <q>A
pious fraud</q> cannot be inspired; an idealizing personification, as a normal type of literature,
can be inspired.</q> Yet Bernhard Schäfer, Das Buch Koheleth, ably maintains
the Solomonic authorship.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Moral truth may be put by Scripture writers into parabolic or dramatic
form, and the sayings of Satan and of perverse men may form parts
of such a production. In such cases, inspiration may vouch, not for the
historical truth, much less for the moral truth of each separate statement,
but only for the correspondence of the whole with ideal fact; in other
words, inspiration may guarantee that the story is true to nature, and is
valuable as conveying divine instruction.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It is not necessary to suppose that the poetical speeches of Job's friends were actually
delivered in the words that have come down to us. Though Job never had had a historical
existence, the book would still be of the utmost value, and would convey to us
a vast amount of true teaching with regard to the dealings of God and the problem of
evil. Fact is local; truth is universal. Some novels contain more truth than can be
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
found in some histories. Other books of Scripture, however, assure us that Job was an
actual historical character (<emph>Ez. 14:14</emph>; <emph>James 5:11</emph>). Nor is it necessary to suppose that our
Lord, in telling the parable of the Prodigal Son (<emph>Luke 15:11-32</emph>) or that of the Unjust
Steward (<emph>16:1-8</emph>), had in mind actual persons of whom each parable was an exact
description.
</p>

<p>
Fiction is not an unworthy vehicle of spiritual truth. Parable, and even fable, may
convey valuable lessons. In <emph>Judges 9:14, 15</emph>, the trees, the vine, the bramble, all talk. If
truth can be transmitted in myth and legend, surely God may make use of these
methods of communicating it, and even though <emph>Gen. 1-3</emph> were mythical it might still be
inspired. Aristotle said that poetry is truer than history. The latter only tells us that
certain things happened. Poetry presents to us the permanent passions, aspirations
and deeds of men which are behind all history and which make it what it is; see Dewey,
Psychology, 197. Though Job were a drama and Jonah an apologue, both might be
inspired. David Copperfield, the Apology of Socrates, Fra Lippo Lippi, were not the
authors of the productions which bear their names, but Dickens, Plato and Browning,
rather. Impersonation is a proper method in literature. The speeches of Herodotus
and Thucydides might be analogues to those in Deuteronomy and in the Acts, and
yet these last might be inspired.
</p>

<p>
The book of Job could not have been written in patriarchal times. Walled cities,
kings, courts, lawsuits, prisons, stocks, mining enterprises, are found in it. Judges
are bribed by the rich to decide against the poor. All this belongs to the latter years
of the Jewish Kingdom. Is then the book of Job all a lie? No more than Bunyan's
Pilgrim's Progress and the parable of the Good Samaritan are all a lie. The book of
Job is a dramatic poem. Like Macbeth or the Ring and the Book, it is founded in fact.
H. P. Smith, Biblical Scholarship and Inspiration, 101&mdash;<q>The value of the book of Job
lies in the spectacle of a human soul in its direst affliction working through its doubts,
and at last humbly confessing its weakness and sinfulness in the presence of its
Maker. The inerrancy is not in Job's words or in those of his friends, but in the truth
of the picture presented. If Jehovah's words at the end of the book are true, then the
first thirty-five chapters are not infallible teaching.</q>
</p>

<p>
Gore, in Lux Mundi, 355, suggests in a similar manner that the books of Jonah and of
Daniel may be dramatic compositions worked up upon a basis of history. George
Adam Smith, in the Expositors' Bible, tells us that Jonah flourished 780 B. C., in the
reign of Jeroboam II. Nineveh fell in 606. The book implies that it was written after
this (<emph>3:3</emph>&mdash;<q>Nineveh <emph>was</emph> an exceeding great city</q>). The book does not claim to be written by
Jonah, by an eye-witness, or by a contemporary. The language has Aramaic forms.
The date is probably 300 B. C. There is an absence of precise data, such as the sin of
Nineveh, the journey of the prophet thither, the place where he was cast out on land, the
name of the Assyrian king. The book illustrates God's mission of prophecy to the Gentiles,
his care for them, their susceptibility to his word. Israel flies from duty, but is
delivered to carry salvation to the heathen. Jeremiah had represented Israel as swallowed
up and cast out (<emph>Jer. 51:34, 44 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>&mdash;<q>Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me ...
he hath, like a monster, swallowed me up, he hath filled his maw with my delicacies; he hath cast me out.... I will
bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath swallowed up.</q></emph>) Some tradition of Jonah's proclaiming
doom to Nineveh may have furnished the basis of the apologue. Our Lord uses the
story as a mere illustration, like the homiletic use of Shakespeare's dramas. <q>As Macbeth
did,</q> <q>As Hamlet said,</q> do not commit us to the historical reality of Macbeth or
of Hamlet. Jesus may say as to questions of criticism: <emph><q>Man, who made me a judge or a divider
over you?</q> <q>I came not to judge the world, but to save the world</q> (Luke 12:14; John 12:47)</emph>. He had no
thought of confirming, or of not confirming, the historic character of the story. It is
hard to conceive the compilation of a psalm by a man in Jonah's position. It is not
the prayer of one inside the fish, but of one already saved. More than forty years ago
President Woolsey of Yale conceded that the book of Jonah was probably an apologue.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) In none of these cases ought the difficulty of distinguishing man's
words from God's words, or ideal truth from actual truth, to prevent our
acceptance of the fact of inspiration; for in this very variety of the Bible,
combined with the stimulus it gives to inquiry and the general plainness of
its lessons, we have the very characteristics we should expect in a book
whose authorship was divine.
</p>

<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Scripture is a stream in which <q>the lamb may wade and the elephant may swim.</q>
There is need both of literary sense and of spiritual insight to interpret it. This sense
and this insight can be given only by the Spirit of Christ, the Holy Spirit, who inspired
the various writings to witness of him in various ways, and who is present in the world
to take of the things of Christ and show them to us (<emph>Mat. 28:20</emph>; <emph>John 16:13, 14</emph>). In a subordinate
sense the Holy Spirit inspires us to recognize inspiration in the Bible. In the
sense here suggested we may assent to the words of Dr. Charles H. Parkhurst at the
inauguration of William Adams Brown as Professor of Systematic Theology in the
Union Theological Seminary, November 1, 1898&mdash;<q>Unfortunately we have condemned
the word <q>inspiration</q> to a particular and isolated field of divine operation, and it is a
trespass upon current usage to employ it in the full urgency of its Scriptural intent in
connection with work like your own or mine. But the word voices a reality that lies so
close to the heart of the entire Christian matter that we can ill afford to relegate it to
any single or technical function. Just as much to-day as back at the first beginnings
of Christianity, those who would <emph>declare</emph> the truths of God must be inspired to <emph>behold</emph>
the truths of God.... The only irresistible persuasiveness is that which is born of vision,
and it is <emph>not</emph> vision to be able merely to describe what some seer has seen, though
it were Moses or Paul that was the seer.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>10. Acknowledgment of the non-inspiration of Scripture teachers
and their writings.</head>

<p>
This charge rests mainly upon the misinterpretation of two particular
passages:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Acts 23:5 (<q>I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest</q>)
may be explained either as the language of indignant irony: <q>I would not
recognize such a man as high priest</q>; or, more naturally, an actual confession
of personal ignorance and fallibility, which does not affect the inspiration
of any of Paul's final teachings or writings.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Of a more reprehensible sort was Peter's dissimulation at Antioch, or practical disavowal
of his convictions by separating or withdrawing himself from the Gentile
Christians (<emph>Gal. 2:11-13</emph>). Here was no public teaching, but the influence of private
example. But neither in this case, nor in that mentioned above, did God suffer the
error to be a final one. Through the agency of Paul, the Holy Spirit set the matter
right.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) 1 Cor. 7:12, 10 (<q>I, not the Lord</q>; <q>not I, but the Lord</q>). Here
the contrast is not between the apostle inspired and the apostle uninspired,
but between the apostle's words and an actual saying of our Lord, as in
Mat. 5:32; 19:3-10; Mark 10:11; Luke 16:18 (Stanley on Corinthians).
The expressions may be paraphrased:&mdash;<q>With regard to this matter no
express command was given by Christ before his ascension. As one inspired
by Christ, however, I give you my command.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Meyer on <emph>1 Cor. 7:10</emph>&mdash;<q>Paul distinguishes, therefore, here and in verses 12, 25, not
between <emph>his own</emph> and <emph>inspired</emph> commands, but between those which proceeded from his
own (God-inspired) subjectivity and those which Christ himself supplied by his objective
word.</q> <q>Paul knew from the living voice of tradition what commands Christ had
given concerning divorce.</q> Or if it should be maintained that Paul here disclaims
inspiration,&mdash;a supposition contradicted by the following δοκῶ&mdash;<emph><q>I think that I also have the
Spirit of God</q> (verse 40)</emph>,&mdash;it only proves a single exception to his inspiration, and since it is
expressly mentioned, and mentioned only once, it implies the inspiration of all the rest
of his writings. We might illustrate Paul's method, if this were the case, by the course
of the New York Herald when it was first published. Other journals had stood by
their own mistakes and had never been willing to acknowledge error. The Herald
gained the confidence of the public by correcting every mistake of its reporters. The
result was that, when there was no confession of error, the paper was regarded as absolutely
trustworthy. So Paul's one acknowledgment of non-inspiration might imply
that in all other cases his words had divine authority. On Authority in Religion, see
Wilfred Ward, in Hibbert Journal, July, 1903:677-692.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part IV. The Nature, Decrees, And Works Of God.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. The Attributes Of God.</head>

<p>
In contemplating the words and acts of God, as in contemplating the
words and acts of individual men, we are compelled to assign uniform and
permanent effects to uniform and permanent causes. Holy acts and words,
we argue, must have their source in a principle of holiness; truthful acts
and words, in a settled proclivity to truth; benevolent acts and words, in a
benevolent disposition.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, these permanent and uniform sources of expression and action
to which we have applied the terms principle, proclivity, disposition, since
they exist harmoniously in the same person, must themselves inhere, and
find their unity, in an underlying spiritual substance or reality of which
they are the inseparable characteristics and partial manifestations.
</p>

<p>
Thus we are led naturally from the works to the attributes, and from the
attributes to the essence, of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
For all practical purposes we may use the words essence, substance, being, nature, as
synonymous with each other. So, too, we may speak of attribute, quality, characteristic,
principle, proclivity, disposition, as practically one. As, in cognizing matter, we
pass from its effects in sensation to the qualities which produce the sensations, and
then to the material substance to which the qualities belong; and as, in cognizing mind,
we pass from its phenomena in thought and action to the faculties and dispositions
which give rise to these phenomena, and then to the mental substance to which these
faculties and dispositions belong; so, in cognizing God, we pass from his words and
acts to his qualities or attributes, and then to the substance or essence to which these
qualities or attributes belong.
</p>

<p>
The teacher in a Young Ladies' Seminary described substance as a cushion, into which
the attributes as pins are stuck. But pins and cushion alike are substance,&mdash;neither
one is quality. The opposite error is illustrated from the experience of Abraham Lincoln
on the Ohio River. <q>What is this transcendentalism that we hear so much about?</q>
asked Mr. Lincoln. The answer came: <q>You see those swallows digging holes in
yonder bank? Well, take away the bank from around those holes, and what is left is
transcendentalism.</q> Substance is often represented as being thus transcendental. If
such representations were correct, metaphysics would indeed be <q>that, of which those
who listen understand nothing, and which he who speaks does not himself understand,</q>
and the metaphysician would be the fox who ran into the hole and then pulled in the
hole after him. Substance and attributes are correlates,&mdash;neither one is possible without
the other. There is no quality that does not qualify something; and there is no
thing, either material or spiritual, that can be known or can exist without qualities to
differentiate it from other things. In applying the categories of substance and attribute
to God, we indulge in no merely curious speculation, but rather yield to the necessities
of rational thought and show how we must think of God if we think at all. See
Shedd, History of Doctrine, 1:240; Kahnis, Dogmatik, 3:172-188.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Definition of the term Attributes.</head>

<p>
The attributes of God are those distinguishing characteristics of the
divine nature which are inseparable from the idea of God and which constitute
the basis and ground for his various manifestations to his creatures.
</p>

<p>
We call them attributes, because we are compelled to attribute them to
God as fundamental qualities or powers of his being, in order to give
rational account of certain constant facts in God's self-revelations.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Relation of the divine Attributes to the divine Essence.</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>The attributes have an objective existence.</hi> They are not mere
names for human conceptions of God&mdash;conceptions which have their only
ground in the imperfection of the finite mind. They are qualities objectively
distinguishable from the divine essence and from each other.
</p>

<p>
The nominalistic notion that God is a being of absolute simplicity, and
that in his nature there is no internal distinction of qualities or powers,
tends directly to pantheism; denies all reality of the divine perfections;
or, if these in any sense still exist, precludes all knowledge of them on the
part of finite beings. To say that knowledge and power, eternity and holiness,
are identical with the essence of God and with each other, is to deny
that we know God at all.
</p>

<p>
The Scripture declarations of the possibility of knowing God, together
with the manifestation of the distinct attributes of his nature, are conclusive
against this false notion of the divine simplicity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Aristotle says well that there is no such thing as a science of the unique, of that
which has no analogies or relations. Knowing is distinguishing; what we cannot distinguish
from other things we cannot know. Yet a false tendency to regard God as a
being of absolute simplicity has come down from mediæval scholasticism, has infected
much of the post-reformation theology, and is found even so recently as in Schleiermacher,
Rothe, Olshausen, and Ritschl. E. G. Robinson defines the attributes as <q>our
methods of conceiving of God.</q> But this definition is influenced by the Kantian doctrine
of relativity and implies that we cannot know God's essence, that is, the thing-in-itself,
God's real being. Bowne, Philosophy of Theism, 141&mdash;<q>This notion of the
divine simplicity reduces God to a rigid and lifeless stare.... The One is manifold
without being many.</q>
</p>

<p>
The divine simplicity is the starting-point of Philo: God is a being absolutely bare
of quality. All quality in finite beings has limitation, and no limitation can be predicated
of God who is eternal, unchangeable, simple substance, free, self-sufficient, better
than the good and the beautiful. To predicate any quality of God would reduce him to
the sphere of finite existence. Of him we can only say <emph>that</emph> he is, not <emph>what</emph> he is; see
art. by Schürer, in Encyc. Brit., 18:761.
</p>

<p>
Illustrations of this tendency are found in Scotus Erigena: <q>Deus nescit se quid est,
quia non est quid</q>; and in Occam: The divine attributes are distinguished neither
substantially nor logically from each other or from the divine essence; the only distinction
is that of names; so Gerhard and Quenstedt. Charnock, the Puritan writer,
identifies both knowledge and will with the simple essence of God. Schleiermacher
makes all the attributes to be modifications of power or causality; in his system God
and world = the <q>natura naturans</q> and <q>natura naturata</q> of Spinoza. There is no
distinction of attributes and no succession of acts in God, and therefore no real personality
or even spiritual being; see Pfleiderer, Prot. Theol. seit Kant, 110. Schleiermacher
said: <q>My God is the Universe.</q> God is causative force. Eternity, omniscience
and holiness are simply aspects of causality. Rothe, on the other hand, makes
omniscience to be the all-comprehending principle of the divine nature; and Olshausen,
on <emph>John 1:1</emph>, in a similar manner attempts to prove that the Word of God must have
objective and substantial being, by assuming that knowing = willing; whence it
would seem to follow that, since God wills all that he knows, he must will moral evil.
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
Bushnell and others identify righteousness in God with benevolence, and therefore
cannot see that any atonement needs to be made to God. Ritschl also holds that love
is the fundamental divine attribute, and that omnipotence and even personality are
simply modifications of love; see Mead, Ritschl's Place in the History of Doctrine, 8.
Herbert Spencer only carries the principle further when he concludes God to be simple
unknowable force.
</p>

<p>
But to call God everything is the same as to call him nothing. With Dorner, we say
that <q>definition is no limitation.</q> As we rise in the scale of creation from the mere
jelly-sac to man, the homogeneous becomes the heterogeneous, there is differentiation
of functions, complexity increases. We infer that God, the highest of all, instead of
being simple force, is infinitely complex, that he has an infinite variety of attributes
and powers. Tennyson, Palace of Art (lines omitted in the later editions): <q>All
nature widens upward: evermore The simpler essence lower lies: More complex is
more perfect, owning more Discourse, more widely wise.</q>
</p>

<p>
<emph>Jer. 10:10</emph>&mdash;God is <emph><q>the living God</q></emph>; <emph>John 5:26</emph>&mdash;he <emph><q>hath life in himself</q></emph>&mdash;unsearchable riches of
positive attributes; <emph>John 17:23&mdash;<q>thou lovedst me</q></emph>&mdash;manifoldness in unity. This complexity
in God is the ground of blessedness for him and of progress for us: <emph>1 Tim. 1:11&mdash;<q>the blessed
God</q></emph>; <emph>Jer. 9:23, 24&mdash;<q>let him glory in this, that he knoweth me.</q></emph> The complex nature of God permits
anger at the sinner and compassion for him at the same moment: <emph>Ps. 7:11&mdash;<q>a God
that hath indignation every day</q></emph>; <emph>John 3:16&mdash;<q>God so loved the world</q></emph>; <emph>Ps. 85:10, 11&mdash;<q>mercy and truth are met
together.</q></emph> See Julius Müller, Doct. Sin, 2:116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Schweizer, Glaubenslehre, 1:229-235;
Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 1:43, 50; Martensen, Dogmatics, 91&mdash;<q>If God
were the simple One, τὸ ἁπλῶς ἕν, the mystic abyss in which every form of determination
were extinguished, there would be nothing in the Unity to be known.</q> Hence <q>nominalism
is incompatible with the idea of revelation. We teach, with realism, that the
attributes of God are objective determinations in his revelation and as such are rooted
in his inmost essence.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>The attributes inhere in the divine essence.</hi> They are not separate
existences. They are attributes of God.
</p>

<p>
While we oppose the nominalistic view which holds them to be mere
names with which, by the necessity of our thinking, we clothe the one simple
divine essence, we need equally to avoid the opposite realistic extreme
of making them separate parts of a composite God.
</p>

<p>
We cannot conceive of attributes except as belonging to an underlying
essence which furnishes their ground of unity. In representing God as a
compound of attributes, realism endangers the living unity of the Godhead.
</p>

<p>
Notice the analogous necessity of attributing the properties of matter to an underlying
substance, and the phenomena of thought to an underlying spiritual essence;
else matter is reduced to mere force, and mind, to mere sensation,&mdash;in short, all things
are swallowed up in a vast idealism. The purely realistic explanation of the attributes
tends to low and polytheistic conceptions of God. The mythology of Greece was the
result of personifying the divine attributes. The <foreign rend='italic'>nomina</foreign> were turned into <foreign rend='italic'>numina</foreign>,
as Max Müller says; see Taylor, Nature on the Basis of Realism, 293. Instance also
Christmas Evans's sermon describing a Council in the Godhead, in which the attributes
of Justice, Mercy, Wisdom, and Power argue with one another. Robert Hall called
Christmas Evans <q>the one-eyed orator of Anglesey,</q> but added that his one eye could
<q>light an army through a wilderness</q>; see Joseph Cross, Life and Sermons of Christmas
Evans, 112-116; David Rhys Stephen, Memoirs of Christmas Evans, 168-176. We must
remember that <q>Realism may so exalt the attributes that no personal subject is left to
constitute the ground of unity. Looking upon Personality as anthropomorphism, it
falls into a worse personification, that of omnipotence, holiness, benevolence, which
are mere blind thoughts, unless there is one who is the Omnipotent, the Holy, the
Good.</q> See Luthardt, Compendium der Dogmatik, 70.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>The attributes belong to the divine essence as such.</hi> They are to be
distinguished from those other powers or relations which do not appertain
to the divine essence universally.
</p>

<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>

<p>
The personal distinctions (<foreign rend='italic'>proprietates</foreign>) in the nature of the one God
are not to be denominated attributes; for each of these personal distinctions
belongs not to the divine essence as such and universally, but only to the
particular person of the Trinity who bears its name, while on the contrary
all of the attributes belong to each of the persons.
</p>

<p>
The relations which God sustains to the world (<foreign rend='italic'>predicata</foreign>), moreover,
such as creation, preservation, government, are not to be denominated
attributes; for these are accidental, not necessary or inseparable from the
idea of God. God would be God, if he had never created.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
To make creation eternal and necessary is to dethrone God and to enthrone a fatalistic
development. It follows that the nature of the attributes is to be illustrated, not
alone or chiefly from wisdom and holiness in man, which are not inseparable from man's
nature, but rather from intellect and will in man, without which he would cease to be
man altogether. Only that is an attribute, of which it can be safely said that he who
possesses it would, if deprived of it, cease to be God. Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:335&mdash;<q>The
attribute is the whole essence acting in a certain way. The centre of unity is not
in any one attribute, but in the essence.... The difference between the divine attribute
and the divine person is, that the person is a mode of the <emph>existence</emph> of the essence,
while the attribute is a mode either of the <emph>relation</emph>, or of the <emph>operation</emph>, of the essence.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>The attributes manifest the divine essence.</hi> The essence is revealed
only through the attributes. Apart from its attributes it is unknown and
unknowable.
</p>

<p>
But though we can know God only as he reveals to us his attributes, we
do, notwithstanding, in knowing these attributes, know the being to whom
these attributes belong. That this knowledge is partial does not prevent
its corresponding, so far as it goes, to objective reality in the nature of God.
</p>

<p>
All God's revelations are, therefore, revelations of himself in and through
his attributes. Our aim must be to determine from God's works and words
what qualities, dispositions, determinations, powers of his otherwise unseen
and unsearchable essence he has actually made known to us; or in other
words, what are the revealed attributes of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>John 1:18&mdash;<q>No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father,
he hath declared him</q></emph>; <emph>1 Tim. 6:16&mdash;<q>whom no man hath seen, nor can see</q></emph>; <emph>Mat. 5:8&mdash;<q>Blessed are the pure
in heart: for they shall see God</q></emph>; <emph>11:27&mdash;<q>neither doth any man know the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever
the Son willeth to reveal him.</q></emph> C. A. Strong: <q>Kant, not content with knowing the reality
<emph>in</emph> the phenomena, was trying to know the reality <emph>apart from</emph> the phenomena; he was
seeking to know, without fulfilling the conditions of knowledge; in short, he wished
to know without knowing.</q> So Agnosticism perversely regards God as concealed by
his own manifestation. On the contrary, in knowing the phenomena we know the
object itself. J. C. C. Clarke, Self and the Father, 6&mdash;<q>In language, as in nature, there
are no verbs without subjects, but we are always hunting for the noun that has no
adjective, and the verb that has no subject, and the subject that has no verb. Consciousness
is necessarily a consciousness of self. Idealism and monism would like to see
all verbs solid with their subjects, and to write <q>I do</q> or <q>I feel</q> in the mazes of a monogram,
but consciousness refuses, and before it says <q>Do</q> or <q>Feel</q> it finishes saying
<q>I.</q></q> J. G. Holland's Katrina, to her lover: <q>God is not worshiped in his attributes.
I do not love your attributes, but you. Your attributes all meet me otherwhere, Blended
in other personalities, Nor do I love nor do I worship them, Nor those who bear
them. E'en the spotted pard Will dare a danger which will make you pale; But shall
his courage steal my heart from you? You cheat your conscience, for you know That
I may like your attributes. Yet love not you.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Methods of determining the divine Attributes.</head>

<p>
We have seen that the existence of God is a first truth. It is presupposed
in all human thinking, and is more or less consciously recognized by
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
all men. This intuitive knowledge of God we have seen to be corroborated
and explicated by arguments drawn from nature and from mind. Reason
leads us to a causative and personal Intelligence upon whom we depend.
This Being of indefinite greatness we clothe, by a necessity of our thinking,
with all the attributes of perfection. The two great methods of determining
what these attributes are, are the Rational and the Biblical.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>The Rational method.</hi> This is threefold:&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>via negationis</foreign>,
or the way of negation, which consists in denying to God all imperfections
observed in created beings; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>via eminentiæ</foreign>, or the way of climax,
which consists in attributing to God in infinite degree all the perfections
found in creatures; and (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>via causalitatis</foreign>, or the way of causality,
which consists in predicating of God those attributes which are required in
him to explain the world of nature and of mind.
</p>

<p>
This rational method explains God's nature from that of his creation,
whereas the creation itself can be fully explained only from the nature of
God. Though the method is valuable, it has insuperable limitations, and
its place is a subordinate one. While we use it continually to confirm and
supplement results otherwise obtained, our chief means of determining the
divine attributes must be
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>The Biblical method.</hi> This is simply the inductive method, applied
to the facts with regard to God revealed in the Scriptures. Now that we
have proved the Scriptures to be a revelation from God, inspired in every
part, we may properly look to them as decisive authority with regard to
God's attributes.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The rational method of determining the attributes of God is sometimes said to have
been originated by Dionysius the Areopagite, reputed to have been a judge at Athens
at the time of Paul and to have died A. D. 95. It is more probably eclectic, combining
the results attained by many theologians, and applying the intuitions of perfection and
causality which lie at the basis of all religious thinking. It is evident from our previous
study of the arguments for God's existence, that from nature we cannot learn either
the Trinity or the mercy of God, and that these deficiencies in our rational conclusions
with respect to God must be supplied, if at all, by revelation. Spurgeon, Autobiography,
166&mdash;<q>The old saying is 'Go from Nature up to Nature's God.' But it is hard
work going up hill. The best thing is to go from Nature's God down to Nature; and,
if you once get to Nature's God and believe him and love him, it is surprising how
easy it is to hear music in the waves, and songs in the wild whisperings of the winds,
and to see God everywhere.</q> See also Kahnis, Dogmatik, 3:181.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Classification of the Attributes.</head>

<p>
The attributes may be divided into two great classes: Absolute or Immanent,
and Relative or Transitive.
</p>

<p>
By Absolute or Immanent Attributes, we mean attributes which respect
the inner being of God, which are involved in God's relations to himself,
and which belong to his nature independently of his connection with the
universe.
</p>

<p>
By Relative or Transitive Attributes, we mean attributes which respect
the outward revelation of God's being, which are involved in God's relations
to the creation, and which are exercised in consequence of the existence of
the universe and its dependence upon him.
</p>

<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>

<p>
Under the head of Absolute or Immanent Attributes, we make a three-fold
division into Spirituality, with the attributes therein involved, namely, Life
and Personality; Infinity, with the attributes therein involved, namely,
Self-existence, Immutability, and Unity; and Perfection, with the attributes
therein involved, namely, Truth, Love, and Holiness.
</p>

<p>
Under the head of Relative or Transitive Attributes, we make a three-fold
division, according to the order of their revelation, into Attributes
having relation to Time and Space, as Eternity and Immensity; Attributes
having relation to Creation, as Omnipresence, Omniscience, and Omnipotence;
and Attributes having relation to Moral Beings, as Veracity and
Faithfulness, or Transitive Truth; Mercy and Goodness, or Transitive
Love; and Justice and Righteousness, or Transitive Holiness.
</p>

<p>
This classification may be better understood from the following schedule:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>1. Absolute or Immanent Attributes:</l>
<l>A. Spirituality, involving (a) Life, (b) Personality.</l>
<l>B. Infinity,  involving (a) Self-existence, (b) Immutability, (c) Unity.</l>
<l>C. Perfection, involving (a) Truth, (b) Love, (c) Holiness.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2. Relative or Transitive Attributes:</l>
<l>A. Related to Time and Space&mdash;(a) Eternity, (b) Immensity.</l>
<l>B. Related to Creation&mdash;(a) Omnipresence, (b) Omniscience, (c) Omnipotence.</l>
<l>C. Related to Moral Beings&mdash;(a) Veracity, (b) Mercy, (c) Justice.</l>
</lg>

</quote>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It will be observed, upon examination of the preceding schedule, that our classification
presents God first as Spirit, then as the infinite Spirit, and finally as the perfect Spirit.
This accords with our definition of the term God (see page <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>). It also corresponds
with the order in which the attributes commonly present themselves to the human
mind. Our first thought of God is that of mere Spirit, mysterious and undefined, over
against our own spirits. Our next thought is that of God's greatness; the quantitative
element suggests itself; his natural attributes rise before us; we recognize him as
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
the infinite One. Finally comes the qualitative element; our moral natures recognize
a moral God; over against our error, selfishness and impurity, we perceive his absolute
perfection.
</p>

<p>
It should also be observed that this moral perfection, as it is an immanent attribute,
involves relation of God to himself. Truth, love and holiness, as they respectively
imply an exercise in God of intellect, affection and will, may be conceived of as God's
self-knowing, God's self-loving, and God's self-willing. The significance of this will
appear more fully in the discussion of the separate attributes.
</p>

<p>
Notice the distinction between absolute and relative, between immanent and transitive,
attributes. Absolute = existing in no necessary relation to things outside of God.
Relative = existing in such relation. Immanent = <q>remaining within, limited to, God's
own nature in their activity and effect, inherent and indwelling, internal and subjective&mdash;opposed
to emanent or transitive.</q> Transitive = having an object outside of God
himself. We speak of transitive verbs, and we mean verbs that are followed by an
object. God's transitive attributes are so called, because they respect and affect things
and beings outside of God.
</p>

<p>
The aim of this classification into Absolute and Relative Attributes is to make plain
the divine self-sufficiency. Creation is not a necessity, for there is a πλήρωμα in God
(<emph>Col. 1:19</emph>), even before he makes the world or becomes incarnate. And πλήρωμα is not
<q>the filling material,</q> nor <q>the vessel filled,</q> but <q>that which is complete in itself,</q>
or, in other words, <q>plenitude,</q> <q>fulness,</q> <q>totality,</q> <q>abundance.</q> The whole universe
is but a drop of dew upon the fringe of God's garment, or a breath exhaled from
his mouth. He could create a universe a hundred times as great. Nature is but the
symbol of God. The tides of life that ebb and flow on the far shores of the universe
are only faint expressions of his life. The Immanent Attributes show us how completely
matters of grace are Creation and Redemption, and how unspeakable is the
condescension of him who took our humanity and humbled himself to the death of the
Cross. <emph>Ps. 8:3, 4&mdash;<q>When I consider thy heavens ... what is man that thou art mindful of him?</q></emph> <emph>113:5, 6&mdash;<q>Who
is like unto Jehovah our God, that hath his seat on high, that humbleth himself?</q></emph> <emph>Phil. 2:6, 7&mdash;<q>Who,
existing in the form of God, ... emptied himself, taking the form of a servant.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
Ladd, Theory of Reality, 69&mdash;<q>I know <emph>that</emph> I am, because, as the basis of all discriminations
as to <emph>what</emph> I am, and as the core of all such self-knowledge, I immediately know
myself as <emph>will</emph></q> So as to the non-ego, <q>that things actually are is a factor in my knowledge
of them which springs from the root of an experience with myself as a <emph>will</emph>, at
once active and inhibited, as an agent and yet opposed by another.</q> The ego and
the non-ego as well are fundamentally and essentially <emph>will</emph>. <q>Matter must be, <hi rend='italic'>per se</hi>,
Force. But this is ... to be a Will</q> (439). We know nothing of the atom apart from
its force (442). Ladd quotes from G. E. Bailey: <q>The life-principle, varying only in
degree, is omnipresent. There is but one indivisible and absolute Omniscience and
Intelligence, and this thrills through every atom of the whole Cosmos</q> (446). <q>Science
has only made the Substrate of material things more and more completely self-like</q>
(449). Spirit is the true and essential Being of what is called Nature (472). <q>The ultimate
Being of the world is a self-conscious Mind and Will, which is the Ground of all
objects made known in human experience</q> (550).
</p>

<p>
On classification of attributes, see Luthardt, Compendium, 71; Rothe, Dogmatik, 71;
Kahnis, Dogmatik, 3:162; Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 1:47, 52, 136. On the
general subject, see Charnock, Attributes; Bruce, Eigenschaftslehre.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>V. Absolute or Immanent Attributes.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>First division.&mdash;Spirituality, and attributes therein involved.</head>

<p>
In calling spirituality an attribute of God, we mean, not that we are justified
in applying to the divine nature the adjective <q>spiritual,</q> but that
the substantive <q>Spirit</q> describes that nature (John 4:24, marg.&mdash;<q>God
is spirit</q>; Rom. 1:20&mdash;<q>the invisible things of him</q>; 1 Tim. 1:17&mdash;<q>incorruptible,
invisible</q>; Col. 1:15&mdash;<q>the invisible God</q>). This
implies, negatively, that (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) God is not matter. Spirit is not a refined
form of matter but an immaterial substance, invisible, uncompounded,
indestructible. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) God is not dependent upon matter. It cannot be
shown that the human mind, in any other state than the present, is dependent
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
for consciousness upon its connection with a physical organism.
Much less is it true that God is dependent upon the material universe as
his sensorium. God is not only spirit, but he is pure spirit. He is not
only not matter, but he has no necessary connection with matter (Luke
24:39&mdash;<q>A spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye behold me having</q>).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
John gives us the three characteristic attributes of God when he says that God is
<emph><q>spirit,</q> <q>light,</q> <q>love</q> (John 4:24; 1 John 1:5; 4:8)</emph>,&mdash;not <emph>a</emph> spirit, <emph>a</emph> light, <emph>a</emph> love. Le Conte, in
Royce's Conception of God, 45&mdash;<q>God is spirit, for spirit is essential Life and essential
Energy, and essential Love, and essential Thought; in a word, essential Person.</q> Biedermann,
Dogmatik, 631&mdash;<q>Das Wesen des Geistes als des reinen Gegensatzes zur Materie,
ist das <emph>reine Sein</emph>, das <emph>in sich ist</emph>, aber <emph>nicht da ist</emph>.</q> Martineau, Study, 2:366&mdash;<q>The
subjective Ego is always <emph>here</emph>, as opposed to all else, which is variously <emph>there</emph>....
Without local relations, therefore, the soul is inaccessible.</q> But, Martineau continues,
<q>if matter be but centres of force, all the soul needs may be centres from which to
act.</q> Romanes, Mind and Motion, 34&mdash;<q>Because within the limits of human experience
mind is only known as associated with brain, it does not follow that mind cannot
exist in any other mode.</q> La Place swept the heavens with his telescope, but could
not find anywhere a God. <q>He might just as well,</q> says President Sawyer, <q>have
swept his kitchen with a broom.</q> Since God is not a material being, he cannot be
apprehended by any physical means.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Those passages of Scripture which seem to ascribe to God the possession
of bodily parts and organs, as eyes and hands, are to be regarded as
anthropomorphic and symbolic. <q>When God is spoken of as appearing to
the patriarchs and walking with them, the passages are to be explained as
referring to God's temporary manifestations of himself in human form&mdash;manifestations
which prefigured the final tabernacling of the Son of God
in human flesh. Side by side with these anthropomorphic expressions
and manifestations, moreover, are specific declarations which repress any
materializing conceptions of God; as, for example, that heaven is his throne
and the earth his footstool (Is. 66:1), and that the heaven of heavens cannot
contain him (1 K. 8:27).</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Ex. 33:18-20</emph> declares that man cannot see God and live; <emph>1 Cor. 2:7-16</emph> intimates that without
the teaching of God's Spirit we cannot know God; all this teaches that God is
above sensuous perception, in other words, that he is not a material being. The second
command of the decalogue does not condemn sculpture and painting, but only the
making of images of <emph>God</emph>. It forbids our conceiving God after the likeness of a <emph>thing</emph>,
but it does not forbid our conceiving God after the likeness of our inward <emph>self</emph>, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, as
<emph>personal</emph>. This again shows that God is a spiritual being. Imagination can be used in
religion, and great help can be derived from it. Yet we do not know God by imagination,&mdash;imagination
only helps us vividly to realize the presence of the God whom we
already know. We may almost say that some men have not imagination enough to be
religious. But imagination must not lose its wings. In its representations of God,
it must not be confined to a picture, or a form, or a place. Humanity tends too much
to rest in the material and the sensuous, and we must avoid all representations of God
which would identify the Being who is worshiped with the helps used in order to realize
his presence; <emph>John 4:24&mdash;<q>they that worship him must worship in spirit and truth.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
An Egyptian Hymn to the Nile, dating from the 19th dynasty (14th century B. C.),
contains these words: <q>His abode is not known; no shrine is found with painted figures;
there is no building that can contain him</q> (Cheyne, Isaiah, 2:120). The repudiation
of images among the ancient Persians (Herod. 1:131), as among the Japanese
Shintos, indicates the remains of a primitive spiritual religion. The representation of
Jehovah with body or form degrades him to the level of heathen gods. Pictures of the
Almighty over the chancels of Romanist cathedrals confine the mind and degrade the
conception of the worshiper. We may use imagination in prayer, picturing God as a
benignant form holding out arms of mercy, but we should regard such pictures only
as scaffolding for the building of our edifice of worship, while we recognize, with the
Scripture, that the reality worshiped is immaterial and spiritual. Otherwise our idea of
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
God is brought down to the low level of man's material being. Even man's spiritual
nature may be misrepresented by physical images, as when mediæval artists pictured
death, by painting a doll-like figure leaving the body at the mouth of the person dying.
</p>

<p>
The longing for a tangible, incarnate God meets its satisfaction in Jesus Christ. Yet
even pictures of Christ soon lose their power. Luther said: <q>If I have a picture of
Christ in my heart, why not one upon canvas?</q> We answer: Because the picture in
the heart is capable of change and improvement, as we ourselves change and improve;
the picture upon canvas is fixed, and holds to old conceptions which we should outgrow.
Thomas Carlyle: <q>Men never think of painting the face of Christ, till they lose
the impression of him upon their hearts.</q> Swedenborg, in modern times, represents
the view that God exists in the shape of a man&mdash;an anthropomorphism of which the
making of idols is only a grosser and more barbarous form; see H. B. Smith, System of
Theology, 9, 10. This is also the doctrine of Mormonism; see Spencer, Catechism of
Latter Day Saints. The Mormons teach that God is a man; that he has numerous wives
by whom he peoples space with an infinite number of spirits. Christ was a favorite son
by a favorite wife, but birth as man was the only way he could come into the enjoyment
of real life. These spirits are all the sons of God, but they can realize and enjoy
their sonship only through birth. They are about every one of us pleading to be born.
Hence, polygamy.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We come now to consider the positive import of the term Spirit. The
spirituality of God involves the two attributes of Life and Personality.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Life.</head>

<p>
The Scriptures represent God as the living God.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Jer. 10:10&mdash;<q>He is the living God</q></emph>; <emph>1 Thess. 1:9&mdash;<q>turned unto God from idols, to serve a living and true
God</q></emph>; <emph>John 5:26-<q>hath life in himself</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>14:6&mdash;<q>I am ... the life,</q></emph> and <emph>Heb. 7:16&mdash;<q>the power of an
endless life</q></emph>; <emph>Rev. 11:11&mdash;<q>the Spirit of life.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
Life is a simple idea, and is incapable of real definition. We know it,
however, in ourselves, and we can perceive the insufficiency or inconsistency
of certain current definitions of it. We cannot regard life in God as
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Mere <emph>process</emph>, without a subject; for we cannot conceive of a
divine life without a God to live it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Versus</hi> Lewes, Problems of Life and Mind, 1:10&mdash;<q>Life and mind are processes;
neither is a substance; neither is a force; ... the name given to the whole group of
phenomena becomes the personification of the phenomena, and the product is supposed
to have been the producer.</q> Here we have a product without any producer&mdash;a series
of phenomena without any substance of which they are manifestations. In a similar
manner we read in Dewey, Psychology, 247&mdash;<q>Self is an <emph>activity</emph>. It is not something
which acts; it is activity.... It is constituted by activities.... Through its activity
the soul is.</q> Here it does not appear how there can be activity, without any subject
or being that is active. The inconsistency of this view is manifest when Dewey goes
on to say: <q>The activity may further or develop the self,</q> and when he speaks of
<q>the organic activity of the self.</q> So Dr. Burdon Sanderson: <q>Life is a state of ceaseless
change,&mdash;a state of change with permanence; living matter ever changes while it
is ever the same.</q> <q>Plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose.</q> But this permanent
thing in the midst of change is the subject, the self, the being, that <emph>has</emph> life.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Nor can we regard life as
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Mere <emph>correspondence</emph> with outward condition and environment;
for this would render impossible a life of God before the existence of the
universe.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Versus</hi> Herbert Spencer, Biology, 1:59-71&mdash;<q>Life is the definite combination of
heterogeneous changes, both simultaneous and successive, in correspondence with
external coëxistences and sequences.</q> Here we have, at best, a definition of physical
and finite life; and even this is insufficient, because the definition recognizes no original
source of activity within, but only a power of reaction in response to stimulus
from without. We might as well say that the boiling tea-kettle is alive (Mark Hopkins).
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
We find this defect also in Robert Browning's lines in The Ring and the Book
(The Pope, 1307): <q>O Thou&mdash;as represented here to me In such conception as my
soul allows&mdash;Under thy measureless, my atom-width!&mdash;Man's mind, what is it but a
convex glass Wherein are gathered all the scattered points Picked out of the immensity
of sky, To reunite there, be our heaven for earth, Our known Unknown, our God
revealed to man?</q> Life is something more than a passive receptivity.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Life is rather <emph>mental energy</emph>, or energy of intellect, affection, and
will. God is the living God, as having in his own being a source of being
and activity, both for himself and others.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Life means energy, activity, movement. Aristotle: <q>Life is energy of mind.</q>
Wordsworth, Excursion, book 5:602&mdash;<q>Life is love and immortality, The Being one,
and one the element.... Life, I repeat, is energy of love Divine or human.</q> Prof.
C. L. Herrick, on Critics of Ethical Monism, in Denison Quarterly, Dec. 1896:248&mdash;<q>Force
is energy under resistance, or self-limited energy, for all parts of the universe
are derived from the energy. Energy manifesting itself under self-conditioning or
differential forms is force. The change of pure energy into force is creation.</q> Prof.
Herrick quotes from S. T. Coleridge, Anima Poetæ: <q>Space is the name for God; it is
the most perfect image of soul&mdash;pure soul being to us nothing but unresisted action.
Whenever action is resisted, limitation begins&mdash;and limitation is the first constituent
of body; the more omnipresent it is in a given space, the more that space is body or
matter; and thus all body presupposes soul, inasmuch as all resistance presupposes
action.</q> Schelling: <q>Life is the tendency to individualism.</q>
</p>

<p>
If spirit in man implies life, spirit in God implies endless and inexhaustible life. The
total life of the universe is only a faint image of that moving energy which we call the
life of God. Dewey, Psychology, 253&mdash;<q>The sense of being alive is much more vivid
in childhood than afterwards. Leigh Hunt says that, when he was a child, the sight of
certain palings painted red gave him keener pleasure than any experience of manhood.</q>
Matthew Arnold: <q>Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive, But to be young was very
heaven.</q> The child's delight in country scenes, and our intensified perceptions in brain
fever, show us by contrast how shallow and turbid is the stream of our ordinary life.
Tennyson, Two Voices: <q>'Tis life, whereof our nerves are scant, Oh life, not death, for
which we pant; More life, and fuller, that we want.</q> That life the needy human spirit
finds only in the infinite God. Instead of Tyndall's: <q>Matter has in it the promise and
potency of every form of life,</q> we accept Sir William Crookes's dictum: <q>Life has in
it the promise and potency of every form of matter.</q> See A. H. Strong, on The Living
God, in Philos. and Religion, 180-187.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Personality.</head>

<p>
The Scriptures represent God as a personal being. By personality we
mean the power of self-consciousness and of self-determination. By way
of further explanation we remark:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Self-consciousness is more than consciousness. This last the brute
may be supposed to possess, since the brute is not an automaton. Man is
distinguished from the brute by his power to objectify self. Man is not
only conscious of his own acts and states, but by abstraction and reflection
he recognizes the self which is the subject of these acts and states. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>)
Self-determination is more than determination. The brute shows determination,
but his determination is the result of influences from without; there
is no inner spontaneity. Man, by virtue of his free-will, determines his
action from within. He determines self in view of motives, but his determination
is not caused by motives; he himself is the cause.
</p>

<p>
God, as personal, is in the highest degree self-conscious and self-determining.
The rise in our own minds of the idea of God, as personal,
depends largely upon our recognition of personality in ourselves. Those
who deny spirit in man place a bar in the way of the recognition of this
attribute of God.
</p>

<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Ex. 3:14&mdash;<q>And God said unto Moses, <hi rend='smallcaps'>I am that I am</hi>: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of
Israel, <hi rend='smallcaps'>I am</hi> hath sent me unto you.</q></emph> God is not the everlasting <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>It is</hi>,</q> or <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>I was</hi>,</q> but the
everlasting <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>I am</hi></q> (Morris, Philosophy and Christianity, 128); <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>I am</hi></q> implies both
personality and presence. <emph>1 Cor. 2:11&mdash;<q>the things of God none knoweth, save the Spirit of God</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 1:9&mdash;<q>good
pleasure which he purposed</q></emph>; <emph>11&mdash;<q>the counsel of his will.</q></emph> Definitions of personality are the
following: Boethius&mdash;<q>Persona est animæ rationalis individua substantia</q> (quoted
in Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:415). F. W. Robertson, Genesis 3&mdash;<q>Personality = self-consciousness,
will, character.</q> Porter, Human Intellect, 626&mdash;<q>Distinct subsistence,
either actually or latently self-conscious and self-determining.</q> Harris, Philos. Basis
of Theism: Person = <q>being, conscious of self, subsisting in individuality and identity,
and endowed with intuitive reason, rational sensibility, and free-will.</q> See Harris, 98,
99, quotation from Mansel&mdash;<q>The freedom of the will is so far from being, as it is
generally considered, a controvertible question in philosophy, that it is the fundamental
postulate without which all action and all speculation, philosophy in all its branches
and human consciousness itself, would be impossible.</q>
</p>

<p>
One of the most astounding announcements in all literature is that of Matthew
Arnold, in his <q>Literature and Dogma,</q> that the Hebrew Scriptures recognize in God
only <q>the power, not ourselves, that makes for righteousness</q> = the God of pantheism.
The <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>I am</hi></q> of <emph>Ex. 3:14</emph> could hardly have been so misunderstood, if Matthew Arnold had
not lost the sense of his own personality and responsibility. From free-will in man we
rise to freedom in God&mdash;<q>That living Will that shall endure, When all that seems shall
suffer shock.</q> Observe that personality needs to be accompanied by life&mdash;the power
of self-consciousness and self-determination needs to be accompanied by activity&mdash;in
order to make up our total idea of God as Spirit. Only this personality of God gives
proper meaning to his punishments or to his forgiveness. See Bib. Sac., April, 1884:217-233;
Eichhorn, die Persönlichkeit Gottes.
</p>

<p>
Illingworth, Divine and Human Personality, 1:25, shows that the sense of personality
has had a gradual growth; that its pre-Christian recognition was imperfect; that its
final definition has been due to Christianity. In 29-53, he notes the characteristics of
personality as reason, love, will. The brute <emph>perceives</emph>; only the man <emph>apperceives</emph>, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>,
recognizes his perception as belonging to himself. In the German story, Dreiäuglein,
the three-eyed child, had besides her natural pair of eyes one other to see what the pair
did, and besides her natural will had an additional will to set the first to going right.
On consciousness and self-consciousness, see Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:179-189&mdash;<q>In consciousness
the object is another substance than the subject; but in self-consciousness
the object is the same substance as the subject.</q> Tennyson, in his Palace of Art, speaks
of <q>the abysmal depths of personality.</q> We do not fully know ourselves, nor yet our
relation to God. But the divine consciousness embraces the whole divine content of
being: <emph><q>the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God</q> (1 Cor. 2:10)</emph>.
</p>

<p>
We are not fully masters of ourselves. Our self-determination is as limited as is
our self-consciousness. But the divine will is absolutely without hindrance; God's
activity is constant, intense, infinite; <emph>Job 23:13&mdash;<q>What his soul desireth, even that he doeth</q></emph>; <emph>John 5:17&mdash;<q>My
Father worketh even until now, and I work.</q></emph> Self-knowledge and self-mastery are the
dignity of man; they are also the dignity of God; Tennyson: <q>Self-reverence, self-knowledge,
self-control, These three lead life to sovereign power.</q> Robert Browning,
The Last Ride Together: <q>What act proved all its thought had been? What will but
felt the fleshly screen?</q> Moberly, Atonement and Personality, 6, 161, 216-255&mdash;<q>Perhaps
the root of personality is capacity for affection.</q>... Our personality is incomplete;
we reason truly only with God helping; our love in higher Love endures; we
will rightly, only as God works in us to will and to do; to make us truly ourselves we
need an infinite Personality to supplement and energize our own; we are complete only
in Christ (<emph>Col. 2:9, 10&mdash;<q>In him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, and in him ye are made full.</q></emph>)
</p>

<p>
Webb, on the Idea of Personality as applied to God, in Jour. Theol. Studies, 2:50&mdash;<q>Self
knows itself and what is not itself as two, just because both alike are embraced
within the unity of its experience, stand out against this background, the apprehension
of which is the very essence of that rationality or personality which distinguishes
us from the lower animals. We find that background, God, present in us, or
rather, we find ourselves present in it. But if I find myself present in it, then it, as more
complete, is simply more personal than I. Our not-self is outside of us, so that we are
finite and lonely, but God's not-self is within him, so that there is a mutual inwardness
of love and insight of which the most perfect communion among men is only a faint
symbol. We are 'hermit-spirits,' as Keble says, and we come to union with others
only by realizing our union with God. Personality is not impenetrable in man, for
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
<emph><q>in him we live, and move, and have our being</q> (Acts 17:28)</emph>, and <emph><q>that which hath been made is life in him</q>
(John 1:3, 4)</emph>.</q> Palmer, Theologic Definition, 39&mdash;<q>That which has its cause without
itself is a thing, while that which has its cause within itself is a person.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Second Division.&mdash;Infinity, and attributes therein involved.</head>

<p>
By infinity we mean, not that the divine nature has no known limits
or bounds, but that it has no limits or bounds. That which has simply no
known limits is the indefinite. The infinity of God implies that he is in
no way limited by the universe or confined to the universe; he is transcendent
as well as immanent. Transcendence, however, must not be conceived
as freedom from merely spatial restrictions, but rather as unlimited
resource, of which God's glory is the expression.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Ps. 145:3&mdash;<q>his greatness is unsearchable</q></emph>; <emph>Job 11:7-9&mdash;<q>high as heaven ... deeper than Sheol</q></emph>; <emph>Is. 66:1&mdash;<q>Heaven
is my throne, and the earth is my footstool</q></emph>; <emph>1 K. 8:27&mdash;<q>Heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain
thee</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 11:33&mdash;<q>how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out.</q></emph> There can be no
infinite number, since to any assignable number a unit can be added, which shows that
this number was not infinite before. There can be no infinite universe, because an
infinite universe is conceivable only as an infinite number of worlds or of minds. God
himself is the only real Infinite, and the universe is but the finite expression or symbol
of his greatness.
</p>

<p>
We therefore object to the statement of Lotze, Microcosm, 1:446&mdash;<q>The complete
system, grasped in its totality, offers an expression of the whole nature of the One....
The Cause makes actual existence its complete manifestation.</q> In a similar way
Schurman, Belief in God, 26, 173-178, grants infinity, but denies transcendence: <q>The
infinite Spirit may include the finite, as the idea of a single organism embraces within a
single life a plurality of members and functions.... The world is the expression of
an ever active and inexhaustible will. That the external manifestation is as boundless
as the life it expresses, science makes exceedingly probable. In any event, we have
not the slightest reason to contrast the finitude of the world with the infinity of God....
If the natural order is eternal and infinite, as there seems no reason to doubt, it
will be difficult to find a meaning for <q>beyond</q> or <q>before.</q> Of this illimitable, ever-existing
universe, God is the Inner ground or substance. There is no evidence, neither
does any religious need require us to believe, that the divine Being manifest in the
universe has any actual or possible existence elsewhere, in some transcendent sphere....
The divine will can express itself only as it does, because no other expression
would reveal what it is. Of such a will, the universe is the eternal expression.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In explanation of the term infinity, we may notice:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That infinity can belong to but one Being, and therefore cannot be
shared with the universe. Infinity is not a negative but a positive idea.
It does not take its rise from an impotence of thought, but is an intuitive
conviction which constitutes the basis of all other knowledge.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See Porter, Human Intellect, 651, 652, and this Compendium, pages 59-62. <hi rend='italic'>Versus</hi> Mansel,
Proleg. Logica, chap. 1&mdash;<q>Such negative notions ... imply at once an attempt to
think, and a failure in that attempt.</q> On the contrary, the conception of the Infinite
is perfectly distinguishable from that of the finite, and is both necessary and logically
prior to that of the finite. This is not true of our idea of the universe, of which all we
know is finite and dependent. We therefore regard such utterances as those of Lotze
and Schurman above, and those of Chamberlin and Caird below, as pantheistic in tendency,
although the belief of these writers in divine and human personality saves
them from falling into other errors of pantheism.
</p>

<p>
Prof. T. C. Chamberlin, of the University of Chicago: <q>It is not sufficient to the
modern scientific thought to think of a Ruler outside of the universe, nor of a universe
with the Ruler outside. A supreme Being who does not embrace all the activities and
possibilities and potencies of the universe seems something less than the supremest
Being, and a universe with a Ruler outside seems something less than a universe.
And therefore the thought is growing on the minds of scientific thinkers that the
supreme Being is the universal Being, embracing and comprehending all things.</q>
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
Caird, Evolution of Religion, 2:62&mdash;<q>Religion, if it would continue to exist, must
combine the monotheistic idea with that which it has often regarded as its greatest
enemy, the spirit of pantheism.</q> We grant in reply that religion must appropriate
the element of truth in pantheism, namely, that God is the only substance, ground
and principle of being, but we regard it as fatal to religion to side with pantheism in
its denials of God's transcendence and of God's personality.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That the infinity of God does not involve his identity with <q>the all,</q>
or the sum of existence, nor prevent the coëxistence of derived and finite
beings to which he bears relation. Infinity implies simply that God exists
in no necessary relation to finite things or beings, and that whatever limitation
of the divine nature results from their existence is, on the part of God,
a self-limitation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Ps. 113:5, 6&mdash;<q>that humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven and in the earth.</q></emph> It is
involved in God's infinity that there should be no barriers to his self-limitation in creation
and redemption (see page 9, F.). Jacob Boehme said: <q>God is infinite, for God is
all.</q> But this is to make God all imperfection, as well as all perfection. Harris,
Philos. Basis Theism: <q>The relation of the absolute to the finite is not the mathematical
relation of a total to its parts, but it is a dynamical and rational relation.</q> Shedd,
Dogm. Theol., 1:189-191&mdash;<q>The infinite is not the total; <q>the all</q> is a pseudo-infinite,
and to assert that it is greater than the simple infinite is the same error that is committed
in mathematics when it is asserted that an infinite number plus a vast finite
number is greater than the simple infinite.</q> Fullerton, Conception of the Infinite, 90&mdash;<q>The
Infinite, though it involves unlimited possibility of quantity, is not itself a quantitative
but rather a qualitative conception.</q> Hovey, Studies of Ethics and Religion,
39-47&mdash;<q>Any number of finite beings, minds, loves, wills, cannot reveal fully an infinite
Being, Mind, Love, Will. God must be transcendent as well as immanent in the universe,
or he is neither infinite nor an object of supreme worship.</q>
</p>

<p>
Clarke, Christian Theology, 117&mdash;<q>Great as the universe is, God is not limited to it,
wholly absorbed by what he is doing in it, and capable of doing nothing more. God in
the universe is not like the life of the tree in the tree, which does all that it is capable
of in making the tree what it is. God in the universe is rather like the spirit of a man
in his body, which is greater than his body, able to direct his body, and capable of
activities in which his body has no share. God is a free spirit, personal, self-directing,
unexhausted by his present activities.</q> The Persian poet said truly: <q>The world is a
bud from his bower of beauty; the sun is a spark from the light of his wisdom; the
sky is a bubble on the sea of his power.</q> Faber: <q>For greatness which is infinite
makes room For all things in its lap to lie. We should be crushed by a magnificence
Short of infinity. We share in what is infinite; 'tis ours, For we and it alike are Thine.
What I enjoy, great God, by right of Thee, Is more than doubly mine.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) That the infinity of God is to be conceived of as intensive, rather
than as extensive. We do not attribute to God infinite extension, but
rather infinite energy of spiritual life. That which acts up to the measure
of its power is simply natural and physical force. Man rises above nature
by virtue of his reserves of power. But in God the reserve is infinite.
There is a transcendent element in him, which no self-revelation exhausts,
whether creation or redemption, whether law or promise.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Transcendence is not mere outsideness,&mdash;it is rather boundless supply within. God is
not infinite by virtue of existing <q>extra flammantia mœnia mundi</q> (Lucretius) or
of filling a space outside of space,&mdash;he is rather infinite by being the pure and perfect
Mind that passes beyond all phenomena and constitutes the ground of them. The former
conception of infinity is simply supra-cosmic, the latter alone is properly transcendent;
see Hatch, Hibbert Lectures, 244. <q>God is the living God, and has not yet
spoken his last word on any subject</q> (G. W. Northrup). God's life <q>operates unspent.</q>
There is <q>ever more to follow.</q> The legend stamped with the Pillars of Hercules
upon the old coins of Spain was <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ne plus ultra</foreign>&mdash;<q>Nothing beyond,</q> but when Columbus
discovered America the legend was fitly changed to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Plus ultra</foreign>&mdash;<q>More beyond.</q>
So the motto of the University of Rochester is <foreign rend='italic'>Meliora</foreign>&mdash;<q>Better things.</q>
</p>

<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>

<p>
Since God's infinite resources are pledged to aid us, we may, as Emerson bids us,
<q>hitch our wagon to a star,</q> and believe in progress. Tennyson, Locksley Hall:
<q>Men, my brothers, men the workers, ever reaping something new. That which they
have done but earnest of the things that they shall do.</q> Millet's L'Angelus is a witness
to man's need of God's transcendence. Millet's aim was to paint, not <emph>air</emph> but
<emph>prayer</emph>. We need a God who is not confined to nature. As Moses at the beginning of
his ministry cried, <emph><q>Show me, I pray thee, thy glory</q> (Ex. 33:18)</emph>, so we need marked experiences
at the beginning of the Christian life, in order that we may be living witnesses to the
supernatural. And our Lord promises such manifestations of himself: <emph>John 14:21&mdash;<q>I
will love him, and will manifest myself unto him.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
<emph>Ps. 71:15&mdash;<q>My mouth shall tell of thy righteousness, And of thy salvation all the day; For I know not the numbers
thereof</q></emph> = it is infinite. <emph>Ps. 89:2&mdash;<q>Mercy shall be built up forever</q></emph> = ever growing manifestations
and cycles of fulfilment&mdash;first literal, then spiritual. <emph>Ps. 113:4-6&mdash;<q rend='pre'>Jehovah is high above all
nations, And his glory above the heavens. Who is like unto Jehovah our God, That hath his seat on high, That
humbleth himself</q></emph> [stoopeth down] <emph><q rend='post'>to behold The things that are in heaven and in the earth?</q></emph> <emph>Mal. 2:15&mdash;<q>did
he not make one, although he had the residue of the Spirit?</q></emph> = he might have created many wives
for Adam, though he did actually create but one. In this <emph><q>residue of the Spirit,</q></emph> says Caldwell,
Cities of our Faith, 370, <q>there yet lies latent&mdash;as winds lie calm in the air of a
summer noon, as heat immense lies cold and hidden in the mountains of coal&mdash;the
blessing and the life of nations, the infinite enlargement of Zion.</q>
</p>

<p>
<emph>Is. 52:10&mdash;<q>Jehovah hath made bare his holy arm</q></emph> = nature does not exhaust or entomb God;
nature is the mantle in which he commonly reveals himself; but he is not fettered by
the robe he wears&mdash;he can thrust it aside, and make bare his arm in providential interpositions
for earthly deliverance, and in mighty movements of history for the salvation
of the sinner and for the setting up of his own kingdom. See also <emph>John 1:16&mdash;<q>of
his fulness we all received, and grace for grace</q></emph> = <q>Each blessing appropriated became the foundation
of a greater blessing. To have realized and used one measure of grace was to
have gained a larger measure in exchange for it χάριν ἀντὶ χάριτος</q>; so Westcott, in
Bib. Com., <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>. Christ can ever say to the believer, as he said to Nathanael <emph>(John
1:50): <q>thou shalt see greater things than these.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
Because God is infinite, he can love each believer as much as if that single soul were
the only one for whom he had to care. Both in providence and in redemption the
whole heart of God is busy with plans for the interest and happiness of the single
Christian. Threatenings do not half reveal God, nor his promises half express the
<emph><q>eternal weight of glory</q> (2 Cor. 4:17)</emph>. Dante, Paradiso, 19:40-63&mdash;God <q>Could not upon the
universe so write The impress of his power, but that his word Must still be left in distance
infinite.</q> To <emph><q>limit the Holy One of Israel</q> (Ps. 78:41</emph>&mdash;marg.) is falsehood as well as sin.
</p>

<p>
This attribute of infinity, or of transcendence, qualifies all the other attributes, and
so is the foundation for the representations of majesty and glory as belonging to God
(see <emph>Ex. 33:18</emph>; <emph>Ps. 19:1</emph>; <emph>Is. 6:3</emph>; <emph>Mat. 6:13</emph>; <emph>Acts 7:2</emph>; <emph>Rom. 1:23</emph>; <emph>9:23</emph>; <emph>Heb. 1:3</emph>; <emph>1 Pet. 4:14</emph>; <emph>Rev. 21:23</emph>).
Glory is not itself a divine attribute; it is rather a result&mdash;an objective result&mdash;of the
exercise of the divine attributes. This glory exists irrespective of the revelation and
recognition of it in the creation (<emph>John 17:5</emph>). Only God can worthily perceive and reverence
his own glory. He does all for his own glory. All religion is founded on the
glory of God. All worship is the result of this immanent quality of the divine nature.
Kedney, Christian Doctrine, 1:360-373, 2:354, apparently conceives of the divine
glory as an eternal material environment of God, from which the universe is fashioned.
This seems to contradict both the spirituality and the infinity of God. God's
infinity implies absolute completeness apart from anything external to himself. We
proceed therefore to consider the attributes involved in infinity.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Of the attributes involved in Infinity, we mention:
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Self-existence.</head>

<p>
By self-existence we mean
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) That God is <q><hi rend='italic'>causa sui</hi>,</q> having the ground of his existence in himself.
Every being must have the ground of its existence either in or out
of itself. We have the ground of our existence outside of us. God is not
thus dependent. He is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a se</foreign>; hence we speak of the aseity of God.
</p>

<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
God's self-existence is implied in the name <emph><q>Jehovah</q> (Ex. 6:3)</emph> and in the declaration
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>I am that I am</hi></q> (<emph>Ex. 3:14</emph>), both of which signify that it is God's nature to be. Self-existence
is certainly incomprehensible to us, yet a self-existent person is no greater
mystery than a self-existent thing, such as Herbert Spencer supposes the universe to
be; indeed it is not so great a mystery, for it is easier to derive matter from mind than
to derive mind from matter. See Porter, Human Intellect, 661. Joh. Angelus Silesius:
<q>Gott ist das was Er ist; Ich was Ich durch Ihn bin; Doch kennst du Einen wohl, So
kennst du mich und Ihn.</q> Martineau, Types, 1:302&mdash;<q>A <emph>cause</emph> may be eternal, but
nothing that is <emph>caused</emph> can be so.</q> He protests against the phrase <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa sui</foreign>.</q> So
Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:338, objects to the phrase <q>God is his own cause,</q> because God
is the uncaused Being. But when we speak of God as <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa sui</foreign>,</q> we do not attribute
to him beginning of existence. The phrase means rather that the ground of his existence
is not outside of himself, but that he himself is the living spring of all energy
and of all being.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
But lest this should be misconstrued, we add
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) That God exists by the necessity of his own being. It is his nature
to be. Hence the existence of God is not a contingent but a necessary
existence. It is grounded, not in his volitions, but in his nature.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 2:126, 130, 170, seems to hold that God is primarily
will, so that the essence of God is his act: <q>God's essence does not precede his freedom</q>;
<q>if the essence of God were for him something given, something already present,
the question <q>from whence it was given?</q> could not be evaded; God's essence
must in this case have its origin in something apart from him, and thus the true conception
of God would be entirely swept away.</q> But this implies that truth, reason,
love, holiness, equally with God's essence, are all products of will. If God's essence,
moreover, were his act, it would be in the power of God to annihilate himself. Act
presupposes essence; else there is no God to act. The will by which God exists, and in
virtue of which he is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa sui</foreign>, is therefore not will in the sense of volition, but will in
the sense of the whole movement of his active being. With Müller's view Thomasius
and Delitzsch are agreed. For refutation of it, see Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 2:63.
</p>

<p>
God's essence is not his act, not only because this would imply that he could destroy
himself, but also because before willing there must be being. Those who hold God's
essence to be simple activity are impelled to this view by the fear of postulating some
dead thing in God which precedes all exercise of faculty. So Miller, Evolution of
Love, 43&mdash;<q>Perfect action, conscious and volitional, is the highest generalization,
the ultimate unit, the unconditioned nature, of infinite Being</q>; <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, God's nature
is subjective action, while external nature is his objective action. A better statement,
however, is that of Bowne, Philos. of Theism, 170&mdash;<q>While there is a necessity in the
soul, it becomes controlling only through freedom; and we may say that everyone
must constitute himself a rational soul.... This is absolutely true of God.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Immutability.</head>

<p>
By this we mean that the nature, attributes, and will of God are exempt
from all change. Reason teaches us that no change is possible in God,
whether of increase or decrease, progress or deterioration, contraction or
development. All change must be to better or to worse. But God is
absolute perfection, and no change to better is possible. Change to worse
would be equally inconsistent with perfection. No cause for such change
exists, either outside of God or in God himself.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Psalm 102:27&mdash;<q>thou art the same</q></emph>; <emph>Mal. 3:6&mdash;<q>I, Jehovah, change not</q></emph>; <emph>James 1:17&mdash;<q>with whom can be
no variation, neither shadow that is cast by turning.</q></emph> Spenser, Faerie Queen, Cantos of Mutability,
8:2&mdash;<q>Then 'gin I think on that which nature sayde, Of that same time when no more
change shall be, But steadfast rest of all things, firmly stayed Upon the pillours of
eternity; For all that moveth doth in change delight, But henceforth all shall rest
eternally With him that is the God of Sabaoth hight; Oh thou great Sabaoth God,
grant me that Sabbath's sight!</q> Bowne, Philos. of Theism, 146, defines immutability
as <q>the constancy and continuity of the divine nature which exists through all the
divine acts as their law and source.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>

<p>
The passages of Scripture which seem at first sight to ascribe change to
God are to be explained in one of three ways:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) As illustrations of the varied methods in which God manifests his
immutable truth and wisdom in creation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Mathematical principles receive new application with each successive stage of creation.
The law of cohesion gives place to chemical law, and chemistry yields to vital
forces, but through all these changes there is a divine truth and wisdom which is
unchanging, and which reduces all to rational order. John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity,
2:140&mdash;<q>Immutability is not stereotyped sameness, but impossibility of deviation
by one hair's breadth from the course which is best. A man of great force of
character is continually finding new occasions for the manifestation and application
of moral principle. In God infinite consistency is united with infinite flexibility.
There is no iron-bound impassibility, but rather an infinite originality in him.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) As anthropomorphic representations of the revelation of God's
unchanging attributes in the changing circumstances and varying moral
conditions of creatures.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Gen. 6:6&mdash;<q>it repented Jehovah that he had made man</q></emph>&mdash;is to be interpreted in the light of <emph>Num.
23:19&mdash;<q>God is not a man, that he should lie: neither the son of man, that he should repent.</q></emph> So <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>1 Sam. 15:11</emph>
with <emph>15:29</emph>. God's unchanging holiness requires him to treat the wicked differently
from the righteous. When the righteous become wicked, his treatment of them must
change. The sun is not fickle or partial because it melts the wax but hardens the clay,&mdash;the
change is not in the sun but in the objects it shines upon. The change in God's
treatment of men is described anthropomorphically, as if it were a change in God himself,&mdash;other
passages in close conjunction with the first being given to correct any possible
misapprehension. Threats not fulfilled, as in <emph>Jonah 3:4, 10</emph>, are to be explained by
their conditional nature. Hence God's immutability itself renders it certain that his
love will adapt itself to every varying mood and condition of his children, so as to
guide their steps, sympathize with their sorrows, answer their prayers. God responds
to us more quickly than the mother's face to the changing moods of her babe. Godet, in
The Atonement, 338&mdash;<q>God is of all beings the most delicately and infinitely sensitive.</q>
</p>

<p>
God's immutability is not that of the stone, that has no internal experience, but
rather that of the column of mercury, that rises and falls with every change in the
temperature of the surrounding atmosphere. When a man bicycling against the wind
turns about and goes with the wind instead of going against it, the wind seems to
change, though it is blowing just as it was before. The sinner struggles against the
wind of prevenient grace until he seems to strike against a stone wall. Regeneration
is God's conquest of our wills by his power, and conversion is our beginning to
turn round and to work with God rather than against God. Now we move without
effort, because we have God at our back; <emph>Phil. 2:12, 13&mdash;<q>work out your own salvation ... for
it is God who worketh in you.</q></emph> God has not changed, but we have changed; <emph>John 3:8&mdash;<q>The wind
bloweth where it will ... so is every one that is born of the Spirit.</q></emph> Jacob's first wrestling with the
Angel was the picture of his lifelong self-will, opposing God; his subsequent wrestling
in prayer was the picture of a consecrated will, working with God (<emph>Gen. 32:24-28</emph>).
We seem to conquer God, but he really conquers us. He seems to change, but it is we
who change after all.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) As describing executions, in time, of purposes eternally existing in
the mind of God. Immutability must not be confounded with immobility.
This would deny all those imperative volitions of God by which he enters
into history. The Scriptures assure us that creation, miracles, incarnation,
regeneration, are immediate acts of God. Immutability is consistent with
constant activity and perfect freedom.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The abolition of the Mosaic dispensation indicates no change in God's plan; it is
rather the execution of his plan. Christ's coming and work were no sudden makeshift,
to remedy unforeseen defects in the Old Testament scheme: Christ came rather in <emph><q>the
fulness of the time</q> (Gal. 4:4)</emph>, to fulfill the <emph><q>counsel</q></emph> of God (<emph>Acts 2:23</emph>). <emph>Gen. 8:1&mdash;<q>God remembered
Noah</q></emph> = interposed by special act for Noah's deliverance, showed that he remembered
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
Noah. While we change, God does not. There is no fickleness or inconstancy in
him. Where we once found him, there we may find him still, as Jacob did at Bethel
(<emph>Gen. 35:1, 6, 9</emph>). Immutability is a consolation to the faithful, but a terror to God's enemies
(<emph>Mal. 3:6&mdash;<q>I, Jehovah, change not; therefore ye, O sons of Jacob, are not consumed</q></emph>; <emph>Ps. 7:11&mdash;<q>a God that
hath indignation every day</q></emph>). It is consistent with constant activity in nature and in grace
(<emph>John 5:17&mdash;<q>My Father worketh even until now, and I work</q></emph>; <emph>Job 23:13, 14&mdash;<q>he is in one mind, and who can
turn him?... For he performeth that which is appointed for me: and many such things are with him</q></emph>). If
God's immutability were immobility, we could not worship him, any more than the
ancient Greeks were able to worship Fate. Arthur Hugh Clough: <q>It fortifies my
soul to know, That, though I perish, Truth is so: That, howsoe'er I stray and range,
Whate'er I do, Thou dost not change. I steadier step when I recall That, if I slip, Thou
dost not fall.</q> On this attribute see Charnock, Attributes, 1:310-362; Dorner, Gesammelte
Schriften, 188-377; translated in Bib. Sac., 1879:28-59, 209-223.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. Unity.</head>

<p>
By this we mean (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) that the divine nature is undivided and indivisible
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>unus</foreign>); and (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) that there is but one infinite and perfect Spirit (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>unicus</foreign>).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Deut. 6:4&mdash;<q>Hear, O Israel: Jehovah our God is one Jehovah</q></emph>; <emph>Is. 44:6&mdash;<q>besides me there is no God</q></emph>;
<emph>John 5:44&mdash;<q>the only God</q></emph>; <emph>17:3&mdash;<q>the only true God</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 8:4&mdash;<q>no God but one</q></emph>; <emph>1 Tim. 1:17&mdash;<q>the only
God</q></emph>; <emph>6:15&mdash;<q>the blessed and only Potentate</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 4:5, 6&mdash;<q>one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and
Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in all.</q></emph> When we read in Mason, Faith of the
Gospel, 25&mdash;<q>The unity of God is not numerical, denying the existence of a second; it
is integral, denying the possibility of division,</q> we reply that the unity of God is
both,&mdash;it includes both the numerical and the integral elements.
</p>

<p>
Humboldt, in his Cosmos, has pointed out that the unity and creative agency of the
heavenly Father have given unity to the order of nature, and so have furnished the
impulse to modern physical science. Our faith in a <q>universe</q> rests historically upon
the demonstration of God's unity which has been given by the incarnation and death
of Christ. Tennyson, In Memoriam: <q>That God who ever lives and loves, One God, one
law, one element, And one far off divine event To which the whole creation moves.</q>
See A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 184-187. Alexander McLaren: <q>The heathen
have many gods because they have no one that satisfies hungry hearts or corresponds
to their unconscious ideals. Completeness is not reached by piecing together many
fragments. The wise merchantman will gladly barter a sack full of <q>goodly pearls</q>
for the one of great price. Happy they who turn away from the many to embrace
the One!</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Against polytheism, tritheism, or dualism, we may urge that the notion
of two or more Gods is self-contradictory; since each limits the other and
destroys his godhood. In the nature of things, infinity and absolute perfection
are possible only to one. It is unphilosophical, moreover, to
assume the existence of two or more Gods, when one will explain all the
facts. The unity of God is, however, in no way inconsistent with the doctrine
of the Trinity; for, while this doctrine holds to the existence of
hypostatical, or personal, distinctions in the divine nature, it also holds
that this divine nature is numerically and eternally one.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Polytheism is man's attempt to rid himself of the notion of responsibility to one
moral Lawgiver and Judge by dividing up his manifestations, and attributing them
to separate wills. So Force, in the terminology of some modern theorizers, is only
God with his moral attributes left out. <q>Henotheism</q> (says Max Müller, Origin and
Growth of Religion, 285) <q>conceives of each individual god as unlimited by the power
of other gods. Each is felt, at the time, as supreme and absolute, notwithstanding the
limitations which to our minds must arise from his power being conditioned by the
power of all the gods.</q>
</p>

<p>
Even polytheism cannot rest in the doctrine of many gods, as an exclusive and all-comprehending
explanation of the universe. The Greeks believed in one supreme
Fate that ruled both gods and men. Aristotle: <q>God, though he is one, has many
names, because he is called according to states into which he is ever entering anew.</q>
The doctrine of God's unity should teach men to give up hope of any other God, to
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
reveal himself to them or to save them. They are in the hands of the one and only
God, and therefore there is but one law, one gospel, one salvation; one doctrine, one
duty, one destiny. We cannot rid ourselves of responsibility by calling ourselves
mere congeries of impressions or mere victims of circumstance. As God is one, so
the soul made in God's image is one also. On the origin of polytheism, see articles by
Tholuck, in Bib. Repos., 2:84, 246, 441, and Max Müller, Science of Religion, 124.
</p>

<p>
Moberly, Atonement and Personality, 83&mdash;<q>The Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and end and sum and meaning of Being, is but One. We who believe in a personal
God do not believe in a limited God. We do not mean one more, a bigger specimen of
existences, amongst existences. Rather, we mean that the reality of existence itself
is personal: that Power, that Law, that Life, that Thought, that Love, are ultimately,
in their very reality, identified in one supreme, and that necessarily a personal Existence.
Now such supreme Being cannot be multiplied: it is incapable of a plural: it
cannot be a generic term. There cannot be more than one all-inclusive, more than
one ultimate, more than one God. Nor has Christian thought, at any point, for any
moment, dared or endured the least approach to such a thought or phrase as <q>two
Gods.</q> If the Father is God, and the Son God, they are both the same God wholly,
unreservedly. God is a particular, an unique, not a general, term. Each is not only
God, but is the very same <q>singularis unicus et totus Deus.</q> They are not both <emph>generically</emph>
God, as though <q>God</q> could be an attribute or predicate; but both <emph>identically</emph>
God, the God, the one all-inclusive, indivisible, God.... If the thought that wishes
to be orthodox had less tendency to become tritheistic, the thought that claims to be
free would be less Unitarian.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Third Division.&mdash;Perfection, and attributes therein involved.</head>

<p>
By perfection we mean, not mere quantitative completeness, but qualitative
excellence. The attributes involved in perfection are moral attributes.
Right action among men presupposes a perfect moral organization, a normal
state of intellect, affection and will. So God's activity presupposes a
principle of intelligence, of affection, of volition, in his inmost being, and
the existence of a worthy object for each of these powers of his nature.
But in eternity past there is nothing existing outside or apart from God.
He must find, and he does find, the sufficient object of intellect, affection,
and will, in himself. There is a self-knowing, a self-loving, a self-willing,
which constitute his absolute perfection. The consideration of the immanent
attributes is, therefore, properly concluded with an account of that
truth, love, and holiness, which render God entirely sufficient to himself.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Mat. 5:48&mdash;<q>Ye therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 12:2&mdash;<q>perfect will
of God</q></emph>; <emph>Col. 1:28&mdash;<q>perfect in Christ</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Deut. 32:4&mdash;<q>The Rock, his work is perfect</q></emph>; <emph>Ps. 18:30&mdash;<q>As
for God, his way is perfect.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Truth.</head>

<p>
By truth we mean that attribute of the divine nature in virtue of which
God's being and God's knowledge eternally conform to each other.
</p>

<p>
In further explanation we remark:
</p>

<p>
A. Negatively:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The immanent truth of God is not to be confounded with that
veracity and faithfulness which partially manifest it to creatures. These
are transitive truth, and they presuppose the absolute and immanent
attribute.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Deut 32:4&mdash;<q>A God of faithfulness and without iniquity, Just and right is he</q></emph>; <emph>John 17:3&mdash;<q>the only true God</q></emph>
(ἀληθινόν); <emph>1 John 5:20&mdash;<q>we know him that is true</q></emph> (τὸν ἀληθινόν). In both these passages
ἀληθινός describes God as the genuine, the real, as distinguished from ἀληθής, the veracious
(compare <emph>John 6:32&mdash;<q>the true bread</q></emph>; <emph>Heb. 8:2&mdash;<q>the true tabernacle</q></emph>). <emph>John 14:6&mdash;<q>I am
... the truth.</q></emph> As <emph><q>I am ... the life</q></emph> signifies, not <q>I am the living one,</q> but rather <q>I
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
am he who is life and the source of life,</q> so <q><emph>I am ... the truth</emph></q> signifies, not <q>I am the
truthful one,</q> but <q>I am he who is truth and the source of truth</q>&mdash;in other words,
truth of being, not merely truth of expression. So <emph>1 John 5:7&mdash;<q>the Spirit is the truth.</q></emph>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> 1 Esdras 1:38&mdash;<q>The truth abideth and is forever strong, and it liveth and ruleth
forever</q> = personal truth? See Godet on <emph>John 1:18</emph>; Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:181.
</p>

<p>
Truth is God perfectly revealed and known. It may be likened to the electric current
which manifests and measures the power of the dynamo. There is no realm of
truth apart from the world-ground, just as there is no law of nature that is independent
of the Author of nature. While we know ourselves only partially, God knows himself
fully. John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 1:192&mdash;<q>In the life of God there are
no unrealized possibilities. The presupposition of all our knowledge and activity is
that absolute and eternal unity of knowing and being which is only another expression
for the nature of God. In one sense, he is all reality, and the only reality, whilst all
finite existence is but a <emph>becoming</emph>, which never <emph>is</emph>.</q> Lowrie, Doctrine of St. John,
57-63&mdash;<q>Truth is reality revealed. Jesus is the Truth, because in him the sum of the
qualities hidden in God is presented and revealed to the world, God's nature in terms
of an active force and in relation to his rational creation.</q> This definition however
ignores the fact that God is truth, apart from and before all creation. As an immanent
attribute, truth implies a conformity of God's knowledge to God's being, which
antedates the universe; see B. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) below.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Truth in God is not a merely active attribute of the divine nature.
God is truth, not only in the sense that he is the being who truly knows,
but also in the sense that he is the truth that is known. The passive precedes
the active; truth of being precedes truth of knowing.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Plato: <q>Truth is his (God's) body, and light his shadow.</q> Hollaz (quoted in Thomasius,
Christi Person und Werk, 1:137) says that <q>truth is the conformity of the divine
essence with the divine intellect.</q> See Gerhard, loc. ii:152; Kahnis, Dogmatik, 2:272,
279; 3:193&mdash;<q>Distinguish in God the personal self-consciousness [spirituality, personality&mdash;see
pages 252, 253] from the unfolding of this in the divine knowledge, which can
have no other object but God himself. So far, now, as self-knowing in God is absolutely
identical with his being is he the absolutely true. For truth is the knowledge
which answers to the being, and the being which answers to the knowledge.</q>
</p>

<p>
Royce, World and Individual, 1:270&mdash;<q>Truth either may mean that about which
we judge, <emph>or</emph> it may mean the correspondence between our ideas and their objects.</q>
God's truth is both object of his knowledge and knowledge of his object. Miss Clara
French, The Dramatic Action and Motive of King John: <q>You spell Truth with a
capital, and make it an independent existence to be sought for and absorbed; but,
unless truth is God, what can it do for man? It is only a personality that can touch a
personality.</q> So we assent to the poet's declaration that <q>Truth, crushed to earth,
shall rise again,</q> only because Truth is personal. Christ, the Revealer of God, is the
Truth. He is not simply the medium but also the object of all knowledge; <emph>Eph. 4:20&mdash;<q>ye
did not so learn Christ</q></emph> = ye knew more than the doctrine about Christ,&mdash;ye knew Christ
himself; <emph>John 17:3&mdash;<q>this is life eternal that they should know thee the only true God, and him whom thou
didst send, even Jesus Christ.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Positively:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) All truth among men, whether mathematical, logical, moral, or
religious, is to be regarded as having its foundation in this immanent truth
of the divine nature and as disclosing facts in the being of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
There is a higher Mind than our mind. No apostle can say <q>I am the truth,</q> though
each of them can say <q>I speak the truth.</q> Truth is not a scientific or moral, but a
substantial, thing&mdash;<q>nicht Schulsache, sondern Lebenssache.</q> Here is the dignity of
education, that knowledge of truth is knowledge of God. The laws of mathematics are
disclosures to us, not of the divine reason merely, for this would imply truth outside
of and before God, but of the divine nature. J. W. A. Stewart: <q>Science is possible
because God is scientific.</q> Plato: <q>God geometrizes.</q> Bowne: <q>The heavens are
crystalized mathematics.</q> The statement that two and two make four, or that virtue
is commendable and vice condemnable, expresses an everlasting principle in the being
of God. Separate statements of truth are inexplicable apart from the total revelation
of truth, and this total revelation is inexplicable apart from One who is truth and who
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
is thus revealed. The separate electric lights in our streets are inexplicable apart
from the electric current which throbs through the wires, and this electric current is
itself inexplicable apart from the hidden dynamo whose power it exactly expresses
and measures. The separate lights of truth are due to the realizing agency of the
Holy Spirit; the one unifying current which they partially reveal is the outgoing
work of Christ, the divine Logos; Christ is the one and only Revealer of him who
dwells <emph><q>in light unapproachable; whom no man hath seen, nor can see</q> (1 Tim. 6:16)</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Prof. H. E. Webster began his lectures <q>by assuming the Lord Jesus Christ <emph>and</emph> the
multiplication-table.</q> But this was tautology, because the Lord Jesus Christ, the Truth,
the only revealer of God, includes the multiplication-table. So Wendt, Teaching of
Jesus, 1:257; 2:202, unduly narrows the scope of Christ's revelation when he maintains
that with Jesus truth is not the truth which corresponds to reality but rather the
right conduct which corresponds to the duty prescribed by God. <emph><q>Grace and truth</q> (John
1:17)</emph> then means the favor of God and the righteousness which God approves. To
understand Jesus is impossible without being ethically like him. He is king of truth,
in that he reveals this righteousness, and finds obedience for it among men. This
ethical aspect of the truth, we would reply, important as it is, does not exclude but
rather requires for its complement and presupposition that other aspect of the truth
as the reality to which all being must conform and the conformity of all being to that
reality. Since Christ is the truth of God, we are successful in our search for truth
only as we recognize him. Whether all roads lead to Rome depends upon which way
your face is turned. Follow a point of land out into the sea, and you find only ocean.
With the back turned upon Jesus Christ all following after truth leads only into mist
and darkness. Aristotle's ideal man was <q>a hunter after truth.</q> But truth can
never be found disjoined from love, nor can the loveless seeker discern it. <q>For the
loving worm within its clod Were diviner than a loveless God</q> (Robert Browning).
Hence Christ can say: <emph>John 18:37&mdash;<q>Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) This attribute therefore constitutes the principle and guarantee of
all revelation, while it shows the possibility of an eternal divine self-contemplation
apart from and before all creation. It is to be understood
only in the light of the doctrine of the Trinity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
To all this doctrine, however, a great school of philosophers have opposed themselves.
Duns Scotus held that God's will made truth as well as right. Descartes said
that God could have made it untrue that the radii of a circle are all equal. Lord Bacon
said that Adam's sin consisted in seeking a good in itself, instead of being content with
the merely empirical good. Whedon, On the Will, 316&mdash;<q>Infinite wisdom and infinite
holiness consist in, and result from, God's volitions eternally.</q> We reply that, to make
truth and good matters of mere will, instead of regarding them as characteristics of
God's being, is to deny that anything is true or good in itself. If God can make truth
to be falsehood, and injustice to be justice, then God is indifferent to truth or falsehood,
to good or evil, and he ceases thereby to be God. Truth is not arbitrary,&mdash;it is
matter of being&mdash;the being of God. There are no regulative principles of knowledge
which are not transcendental also. God knows and wills truth, because he is
truth. Robert Browning, A Soul's Tragedy, 214&mdash;<q>Were't not for God, I mean, what
hope of truth&mdash;Speaking truth, hearing truth&mdash;would stay with Man?</q> God's will
does not make truth, but truth rather makes God's will. God's perfect knowledge in
eternity past has an object. That object must be himself. He is the truth Known, as
well as the truthful Knower. But a perfect objective must be personal. The doctrine
of the Trinity is the necessary complement to the doctrine of the Attributes. Shedd,
Dogm. Theol., 1:183&mdash;<q>The pillar of cloud becomes a pillar of fire.</q> See A. H. Strong,
Christ in Creation, 102-112.
</p>

<p>
On the question whether it is ever right to deceive, see Paine, Ethnic Trinities, 300-339.
Plato said that the use of such medicines should be restricted to physicians. The
rulers of the state may lie for the public good, but private people not: <q>officiosum
mendacium.</q> It is better to say that deception is justifiable only where the person
deceived has, like a wild beast or a criminal or an enemy in war, put himself out of
human society and deprived himself of the right to truth. Even then deception is a
sad necessity which witnesses to an abnormal condition of human affairs. With James
Martineau, when asked what answer he would give to an intending murderer when
truth would mean death, we may say: <q>I suppose I should tell an untruth, and then
should be sorry for it forever after.</q> On truth as an attribute of God, see Bib. Sac.,
Oct. 1877:735; Finney, Syst. Theol., 661; Janet, Final Causes, 416.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Love.</head>

<p>
By love we mean that attribute of the divine nature in virtue of which
God is eternally moved to self-communication.
</p>

<p>
<emph>1 John 4:8&mdash;<q>God is love</q></emph>; <emph>3:16&mdash;<q>hereby know we love, because he laid down his life for us</q></emph>; <emph>John
17:24&mdash;<q>thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 15:30&mdash;<q>the love of the Spirit.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
In further explanation we remark:
</p>

<p>
A. Negatively:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The immanent love of God is not to be confounded with mercy and
goodness toward creatures. These are its manifestations, and are to be
denominated transitive love.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 1:138, 139&mdash;<q>God's regard for the happiness of
his creatures flows from this self-communicating attribute of his nature. Love, in the
true sense of the word, is living good-will, with impulses to impartation and union;
self-communication (bonum communicativum sui); devotion, merging of the <emph>ego</emph> in
another, in order to penetrate, fill, bless this other with itself, and in this other, as in
another self, to possess itself, without giving up itself or losing itself. Love is therefore
possible only between persons, and always presupposes personality. Only as
Trinity has God love, absolute love; because as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost he stands
in perfect self-impartation, self-devotion, and communion with himself.</q> Julius
Müller, Doct. Sin, 2:136&mdash;<q>God has in himself the eternal and wholly adequate object
of his love, independently of his relation to the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the Greek mythology, Eros was one of the oldest and yet one of the youngest of
the gods. So Dante makes the oldest angel to be the youngest, because nearest to God
the fountain of life. In <emph>1 John 2:7, 8, <q>the old commandment</q></emph> of love is evermore <q><emph>a new commandment</emph>,</q>
because it reflects this eternal attribute of God. <q>There is a love unstained by
selfishness, Th' outpouring tide of self-abandonment, That loves to love, and deems its
preciousness Repaid in loving, though no sentiment Of love returned reward its sacrament;
Nor stays to question what the loved one will, But hymns its overture with
blessings immanent; Rapt and sublimed by love's exalting thrill, Loves on, through
frown or smile, divine, immortal still.</q> Clara Elizabeth Ward: <q>If I could gather
every look of love, That ever any human creature wore, And all the looks that joy is
mother of, All looks of grief that mortals ever bore, And mingle all with God-begotten
grace, Methinks that I should see the Savior's face.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Love is not the all-inclusive ethical attribute of God. It does not
include truth, nor does it include holiness.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Ladd, Philosophy of Conduct, 352, very properly denies that benevolence is the all-inclusive
virtue. Justness and Truth, he remarks, are not reducible to benevolence.
In a review of Ladd's work in Bib. Sac., Jan. 1903:185, C. M. Mead adds: <q>He comes to
the conclusion that it is impossible to resolve all the virtues into the generic one of
love or benevolence without either giving a definition of benevolence which is unwarranted
and virtually nullifies the end aimed at, or failing to recognize certain virtues
which are as genuinely virtues as benevolence itself. Particularly is it argued that the
virtues of the will (courage, constancy, temperance), and the virtues of judgment
(wisdom, justness, trueness), get no recognition in this attempt to subsume all virtues
under the one virtue of love. 'The unity of the virtues is due to the unity of a
personality, in active and varied relations with other persons' (361). If benevolence
means wishing <emph>happiness</emph> to all men, then happiness is made the ultimate good, and
eudæmonism is accepted as the true ethical philosophy. But if, on the other hand, in
order to avoid this conclusion, benevolence is made to mean wishing the highest
<emph>welfare</emph> to all men, and the highest welfare is conceived as a life of virtue, then we
come to the rather inane conclusion that the essence of virtue is to wish that men
may be virtuous.</q> See also art. by Vos, in Presb. and Ref. Rev., Jan. 1892:1-37.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Nor is God's love a mere regard for being in general, irrespective
of its moral quality.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Jonathan Edwards, in his treatise On the Nature of Virtue, defines virtue as regard
for being in general. He considers that God's love is first of all directed toward himself
as having the greatest quantity of being, and only secondarily directed toward
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
his creatures whose quantity of being is infinitesimal as compared with his. But we
reply that being in general is far too abstract a thing to elicit or justify love. Charles
Hodge said truly that, if obligation is primarily due to being in general, then there
is no more virtue in loving God than there is in loving Satan. Virtue, we hold, must
consist, not in love for being in general, but in love for good being, that is, in love for
God as holy. Love has no moral value except as it is placed upon a right object and is
proportioned to the worth of that object. <q>Love of being in general</q> makes virtue
an irrational thing, because it has no standard of conduct. Virtue is rather the love
of God as right and as the source of right.
</p>

<p>
G. S. Lee, The Shadow-cross, 38&mdash;<q>God is love, and law is the way he loves us. But
it is also true that God is law, and love is the way he rules us.</q> Clarke, Christian
Theology, 88&mdash;<q>Love is God's desire to impart himself, and so all good, to other persons,
and to possess them for his own spiritual fellowship.</q> The intent to communicate
himself is the intent to communicate holiness, and this is the <q>terminus ad
quem</q> of God's administration. Drummond, in his Ascent of Man, shows that Love
began with the first cell of life. Evolution is not a tale of battle, but a love-story.
We gradually pass from selfism to otherism. Evolution is the object of nature, and
altruism is the object of evolution. Man = nutrition, looking to his own things;
Woman = reproduction, looking to the things of others. But the greatest of these is
love. The mammalia = the mothers, last and highest, care for others. As the mother
gives love, so the father gives righteousness. Law, once a latent thing, now becomes
active. The father makes a sort of conscience for those beneath him. Nature, like
Raphael, is producing a Holy Family.
</p>

<p>
Jacob Boehme: <q>Throw open and throw out thy heart. For unless thou dost
exercise thy heart, and the love of thy heart, upon every man in the world, thy self-love,
thy pride, thy envy, thy distaste, thy dislike, will still have dominion over thee....
In the name and in the strength of God, love all men. Love thy neighbor as thyself,
and do to thy neighbor as thou doest to thyself. And do it now. For now is the
accepted time, and now is the day of salvation.</q> These expressions are scriptural and
valuable, if they are interpreted ethically, and are understood to inculcate the supreme
duty of loving the Holy One, of being holy as he is holy, and of seeking to bring all
intelligent beings into conformity with his holiness.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) God's love is not a merely emotional affection, proceeding from
sense or impulse, nor is it prompted by utilitarian considerations.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Of the two words for love in the N. T., φιλέω designates an emotional affection,
which is not and cannot be commanded (<emph>John 11:36&mdash;<q>Behold how he loved him!</q></emph>), while ἀγαπάω
expresses a rational and benevolent affection which springs from deliberate choice
(<emph>John 3:16&mdash;<q>God so loved the world</q></emph>; <emph>Mat. 19:19&mdash;<q>Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself</q></emph>; <emph>5:44&mdash;<q>Love
your enemies</q></emph>). Thayer, N. T. Lex., 653&mdash;Ἀγαπᾶν <q>properly denotes a love founded in
admiration, veneration, esteem, like the Lat. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>diligere</foreign>, to be kindly disposed to one,
to wish one well; but φιλεîν denotes an inclination prompted by sense and emotion,
Lat. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>amare</foreign>.... Hence men are said ἀγαπᾶν God, not φιλεîν.</q> In this word ἀγάπη,
when used of God, it is already implied that God loves, not for what he can get, but
for what he can give. The rationality of his love involves moreover a subordination
of the emotional element to a higher law than itself, namely, that of holiness. Even
God's self-love must have a reason and norm in the perfections of his own being.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Positively:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The immanent love of God is a rational and voluntary affection,
grounded in perfect reason and deliberate choice.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Ritschl, Justification and Reconciliation, 3:277&mdash;<q>Love is will, aiming either at the
appropriation of an object, or at the enrichment of its existence, because moved by a
feeling of its worth.... Love is to persons; it is a constant will; it aims at the promotion
of the other's personal end, whether known or conjectured; it takes up the other's
personal end and makes it part of his own. Will, as love, does not give itself up for
the other's sake; it aims at closest fellowship with the other for a common end.</q> A. H.
Strong, Christ in Creation, 388-405&mdash;<q>Love is not rightfully independent of the other
faculties, but is subject to regulation and control.... We sometimes say that religion
consists in love.... It would be more strictly true to say that religion consists in a
new direction of our love, a turning of the current toward God which once flowed
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
toward self.... Christianity rectifies the affections, before excessive, impulsive, lawless,&mdash;gives
them worthy and immortal objects, regulates their intensity in some due
proportion to the value of the things they rest upon, and teaches the true methods of
their manifestation. In true religion love forms a copartnership with reason....
God's love is no arbitrary, wild, passionate torrent of emotion ... and we become
like God by bringing our emotions, sympathies, affections, under the dominion of reason
and conscience.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Since God's love is rational, it involves a subordination of the
<emph>emotional</emph> element to a higher law than itself, namely, that of truth and
holiness.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Phil. 1:9&mdash;<q>And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and all discernment.</q></emph>
True love among men illustrates God's love. It merges self in another instead of
making that other an appendage to self. It seeks the other's true good, not merely his
present enjoyment or advantage. Its aim is to realize the divine idea in that other, and
therefore it is exercised for God's sake and in the strength which God supplies. Hence
it is a love for holiness, and is under law to holiness. So God's love takes into account
the highest interests, and makes infinite sacrifice to secure them. For the sake of saving
a world of sinners, God <emph><q>spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all</q> (Rom. 8:32)</emph>, and
<emph><q>Jehovah hath laid on him the iniquity of us all</q> (Is. 53:6)</emph>. Love requires a rule or standard for its
regulation. This rule or standard is the holiness of God. So once more we see that
love cannot include holiness, because it is subject to the law of holiness. Love desires
only the best for its object, and the best is <emph>God</emph>. The golden rule does not bid us give
what others desire, but what they need: <emph>Rom. 15:2&mdash;<q>Let each one of us please his neighbor for that
which is good, unto edifying.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The immanent love of God therefore requires and finds a perfect
standard in his own holiness, and a personal object in the image of his own
infinite perfections. It is to be understood only in the light of the doctrine
of the Trinity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
As there is a higher Mind than our mind, so there is a greater Heart than our heart.
God is not simply the loving One&mdash;he is also the Love that is loved. There is an infinite
life of sensibility and affection in God. God has feeling, and in an infinite degree.
But feeling alone is not love. Love implies not merely receiving but giving, not merely
emotion but impartation. So the love of God is shown in his eternal giving. <emph>James 1:5&mdash;<q>God,
who giveth,</q></emph> or <emph><q>the giving God</q></emph> (τοῦ διδόντος Θεοῦ) = giving is not an episode in his
being&mdash;it is his nature to give. And not only to <emph>give</emph>, but to give <emph>himself</emph>. This he
does eternally in the self-communications of the Trinity; this he does transitively and
temporally in his giving of himself for us in Christ, and to us in the Holy Spirit.
</p>

<p>
Jonathan Edwards, Essay on Trinity (ed. G. P. Fisher), 79&mdash;<q>That in John God is
love shows that there are more persons than one in the Deity, for it shows love to be
essential and necessary to the Deity, so that his nature consists in it, and this supposes
that there is an eternal and necessary object, because all love respects another that is
the beloved. By love here the apostle certainly means something beside that which is
commonly called self-love: that is very improperly called love, and is a thing of an
exceeding diverse nature from the affection or virtue of love the apostle is speaking
of.</q> When Newman Smyth, Christian Ethics, 226-239, makes the first characteristic of
love to be self-affirmation, and when Dorner, Christian Ethics, 73, makes self-assertion
an essential part of love, they violate linguistic usage by including under love what
properly belongs to holiness.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The immanent love of God constitutes a ground of the divine blessedness.
Since there is an infinite and perfect object of love, as well as of
knowledge and will, in God's own nature, the existence of the universe is
not necessary to his serenity and joy.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Blessedness is not itself a divine attribute; it is rather a result of the exercise of the
divine attributes. It is a subjective result of this exercise, as glory is an objective
result. Perfect faculties, with perfect objects for their exercise, ensure God's blessedness.
But love is especially its source. <emph>Acts 20:35&mdash;<q>It is more blessed to give than to receive.</q></emph>
Happiness (hap, happen) is grounded in circumstances; blessedness, in character.
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
Love precedes creation and is the ground of creation. Its object therefore cannot be
the universe, for that does not exist, and, if it did exist, could not be a proper object
of love for the infinite God. The only sufficient object of his love is the image of his
own perfections, for that alone is equal to himself. Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 264&mdash;<q>Man
most truly realizes his own nature, when he is ruled by rational, self-forgetful
love. He cannot help inferring that the highest thing in the individual consciousness
is the dominant thing in the universe at large.</q> Here we may assent, if we remember
that not the love itself but that which is loved must be the dominant thing, and we
shall see that to be not love but holiness.
</p>

<p>
Jones, Robert Browning, 219&mdash;<q>Love is for Browning the highest, richest conception
man can form. It is our idea of that which is perfect; we cannot even imagine
anything better. And the idea of evolution necessarily explains the world as the return
of the highest to itself. The universe is homeward bound.... All things are potentially
spirit, and all the phenomena of the world are manifestations of love.... Man's
reason is not, but man's love is, a direct emanation from the inmost being of God</q>
(345). Browning should have applied to truth and holiness the same principle which
he recognized with regard to love. But we gratefully accept his dicta: <q>He that created
love, shall not he love?... God! thou art Love! I build my faith on that.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) The love of God involves also the possibility of divine suffering,
and the suffering on account of sin which holiness necessitates on the part
of God is itself the atonement.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Christ is <emph><q>the Lamb that hath been slain from the foundation of the world</q> (Rev. 13:8);</emph> <emph>1 Pet. 1:19, 20&mdash;<q>precious
blood, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot, even the blood of Christ: who was foreknown indeed
before the foundation of the world.</q></emph> While holiness requires atonement, love provides it. The
blessedness of God is consistent with sorrow for human misery and sin. God is passible,
or capable of suffering. The permission of moral evil in the decree of creation was
at cost to God. Scripture attributes to him emotions of grief and anger at human sin
(<emph>Gen. 6:6&mdash;<q>it grieved him at his heart</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 1:18&mdash;<q>wrath of God</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 4:30&mdash;<q>grieve not the Holy Spirit
of God</q></emph>); painful sacrifice in the gift of Christ (<emph>Rom. 8:32&mdash;<q>spared not his own son</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Gen. 22:16&mdash;<q>hast
not withheld thy son</q></emph>) and participation in the suffering of his people (<emph>Is. 63:9&mdash;<q>in
all their affliction he was afflicted</q></emph>); Jesus Christ in his sorrow and sympathy, his tears and
agony, is the revealer of God's feelings toward the race, and we are urged to follow in
his steps, that we may be perfect, as our Father in heaven is perfect. We cannot,
indeed, conceive of love without self-sacrifice, nor of self-sacrifice without suffering.
It would seem, then, that as immutability is consistent with imperative volitions in
human history, so the blessedness of God may be consistent with emotions of sorrow.
</p>

<p>
But does God feel in proportion to his greatness, as the mother suffers more than the
sick child whom she tends? Does God suffer infinitely in every suffering of his creatures?
We must remember that God is infinitely greater than his creation, and that
he sees all human sin and woe as part of his great plan. We are entitled to attribute to
him only such passibleness as is consistent with infinite perfection. In combining passibleness
with blessedness, then, we must allow blessedness to be the controlling element,
for our fundamental idea of God is that of absolute perfection. Martensen,
Dogmatics, 101&mdash;<q>This limitation is swallowed up in the inner life of perfection which
God lives, in total independence of his creation, and in triumphant prospect of the
fulfilment of his great designs. We may therefore say with the old theosophic writers:
<q>In the outer chambers is sadness, but in the inner ones is unmixed joy.</q></q> Christ was
<q><emph>anointed ... with the oil of gladness above his fellows,</emph></q> and <emph><q>for the joy that was set before him endured the
cross</q> (Heb. 1:9; 12:2)</emph>. Love rejoices even in pain, when this brings good to those beloved.
<q>Though round its base the rolling clouds are spread, Eternal sunshine settles on its
head.</q>
</p>

<p>
In George Adam Smith's Life of Henry Drummond, 11, Drummond cries out after
hearing the confessions of men who came to him: <q>I am sick of the sins of these men!
How can God bear it?</q> Simon, Reconciliation, 338-343, shows that before the incarnation,
the Logos was a sufferer from the sins of men. This suffering however was kept in
check and counterbalanced by his consciousness as a factor in the Godhead, and by the
clear knowledge that men were themselves the causes of this suffering. After he
became incarnate he suffered without knowing whence all the suffering came. He
had a subconscious life into which were interwoven elements due to the sinful conduct
of the race whose energy was drawn from himself and with which in addition he
had organically united himself. If this is limitation, it is also self-limitation which
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
Christ could have avoided by not creating, preserving, and redeeming mankind. We
rejoice in giving away a daughter in marriage, even though it costs pain. The highest
blessedness in the Christian is coincident with agony for the souls of others. We partake
of Christ's joy only when we know the fellowship of his sufferings. Joy and
sorrow can coëxist, like Greek fire, that burns under water.
</p>

<p>
Abbé Gratry, La Morale et la Loi de l'Histoire, 165, 166&mdash;<q>What! Do you really
suppose that the personal God, free and intelligent, loving and good, who knows every
detail of human torture, and hears every sigh&mdash;this God who sees, who loves as we do,
and more than we do&mdash;do you believe that he is present and looks pitilessly on what
breaks your heart, and what to him must be the spectacle of Satan reveling in the
blood of humanity? History teaches us that men so feel for sufferers that they
have been drawn to die with them, so that their own executioners have become the
next martyrs. And yet you represent God, the absolute goodness, as alone impassible?
It is here that our evangelical faith comes in. Our God was made man to suffer
and to die! Yes, here is the true God. He has suffered from the beginning in all who
have suffered. He has been hungry in all who have hungered. He has been immolated
in all and with all who have offered up their lives. He is the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world.</q> Similarly Alexander Vinet, Vital Christianity, 240, remarks
that <q>The suffering God is not simply the teaching of modern divines. It is a New
Testament thought, and it is one that answers all the doubts that arise at the sight of
human suffering. To know that God is suffering with it makes that suffering more
awful, but it gives strength and life and hope, for we know that, if God is in it, suffering
is the road to victory. If he shares our suffering we shall share his crown,</q> and
we can say with the <emph>Psalmist, 68:19&mdash;<q>Blessed be God, who daily beareth our burden, even the God who is
our salvation,</q></emph> and with <emph>Isaiah 63:9&mdash;<q>In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved
them.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
Borden P. Bowne, Atonement: <q>Something like this work of grace was a moral
necessity with God. It was an awful responsibility that was taken when our human
race was launched with its fearful possibilities of good and evil. God thereby put
himself under infinite obligation to care for his human family; and reflections on his
position as Creator and Ruler, instead of removing, only make more manifest this
obligation. So long as we conceive God as sitting apart in supreme ease and self-satisfaction,
he is not <emph>love</emph> at all, but only a reflection of our selfishness and vulgarity.
So long as we conceive him as bestowing blessing upon us out of his infinite fulness,
but at no real cost to himself, he sinks below the moral heroes of our race. There is
ever a higher thought possible, until we see God taking the world upon his heart,
entering into the fellowship of our sorrow, and becoming the supreme burden bearer
and leader in self-sacrifice. Then only are the possibilities of grace and condescension
and love and moral heroism filled up, so that nothing higher remains. And the work
of Christ, so far as it was a historical event, must be viewed not merely as a piece of
history, but also as a manifestation of that cross which was hidden in the divine love
from the foundation of the world, and which is involved in the existence of the human
world at all.</q>
</p>

<p>
Royce, Spirit of Modern Philosophy, 264&mdash;<q>The eternal resolution that, if the world
<emph>will</emph> be tragic, it <emph>shall</emph> still, in Satan's despite, be spiritual, is the very essence of the
eternal joy of that World-Spirit of whose wisdom ours is but a fragmentary reflection....
When you suffer, your sufferings are God's sufferings,&mdash;not his external work nor
his external penalty, nor the fruit of his neglect, but identically his own personal woe.
In you God himself suffers, precisely as you do, and has all your reason for overcoming
this grief.</q> Henry N. Dodge, Christus Victor: <q>O Thou, that from eternity Upon thy
wounded heart hast borne Each pang and cry of misery Wherewith our human hearts
are torn, Thy love upon the grievous cross Doth glow, the beacon-light of time, Forever
sharing pain and loss With every man in every clime. How vast, how vast Thy
sacrifice, As ages come and ages go, Still waiting till it shall suffice To draw the last
cold heart and slow!</q>
</p>

<p>
On the question, Is God passible? see Bennett Tyler, Sufferings of Christ; A Layman,
Sufferings of Christ; Woods, Works, 1:299-317; Bib. Sac., 11:744; 17:422-424; Emmons,
Works, 4:201-208; Fairbairn, Place of Christ, 483-487; Bushnell, Vic. Sacrifice, 59-93;
Kedney, Christ. Doctrine Harmonized, 1:185-245; Edward Beecher, Concord of Ages,
81-204; Young, Life and Light of Men, 20-43, 147-150; Schaff, Hist. Christ. Church,
2:191; Crawford, Fatherhood of God, 43, 44; Anselm, Proslogion, cap. 8; Upton, Hibbert
Lectures, 268; John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 2:117, 118, 137-142. <hi rend='italic'>Per
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
contra</hi>, see Shedd, Essays and Addresses, 277, 279 note; Woods, in Lit. and Theol. Rev.,
1834:43-61; Harris, God the Creator and Lord of All, 1:201. On the Biblical conception
of Love in general, see article by James Orr, in Hastings' Bible Dictionary.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. Holiness.</head>

<p>
Holiness is self-affirming purity. In virtue of this attribute of his nature,
God eternally wills and maintains his own moral excellence. In this definition
are contained three elements: first, purity; secondly, purity willing;
thirdly, purity willing itself.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Ex. 15:11&mdash;<q>glorious in holiness</q></emph>; <emph>19:10-16</emph>&mdash;the people of Israel must purify themselves
before they come into the presence of God; <emph>Is. 6:3&mdash;<q>Holy, holy, holy, is Jehovah of hosts</q></emph>&mdash;notice
the contrast with the unclean lips, that must be purged with a coal from the
altar (<emph>verses 5-7</emph>); <emph>2 Cor, 7:1&mdash;<q>cleanse ourselves from all defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the
fear of God</q></emph>; <emph>1 Thess. 3:13&mdash;<q>unblamable in holiness</q></emph>; <emph>4:7&mdash;<q>God called us not for uncleanness, but in sanctification</q></emph>;
<emph>Heb. 12:29&mdash;<q>our God is a consuming fire</q></emph>&mdash;to all iniquity. These passages show that
holiness is the opposite to impurity, that it is itself purity.
The development of the conception of holiness in Hebrew history was doubtless a
gradual one. At first it may have included little more than the idea of separation from
all that is common, small and mean. Physical cleanliness and hatred of moral evil
were additional elements which in time became dominant. We must remember however
that the proper meaning of a term is to be determined not by the earliest but by
the latest usage. Human nature is ethical from the start, and seeks to express the
thought of a rule or standard of obligation, and of a righteous Being who imposes
that rule or standard. With the very first conceptions of majesty and separation which
attach to the apprehension of divinity in the childhood of the race there mingles at
least some sense of the contrast between God's purity and human sin. The least
developed man has a conscience which condemns some forms of wrong doing, and
causes a feeling of separation from the power or powers above. Physical defilement
becomes the natural symbol of moral evil. Places and vessels and rites are invested
with dignity as associated with or consecrated to the Deity.
</p>

<p>
That the conception of holiness clears itself of extraneous and unessential elements
only gradually, and receives its full expression only in the New Testament revelation
and especially in the life and work of Christ, should not blind us to the fact that
the germs of the idea lie far back in the very beginnings of man's existence upon
earth. Even then the sense of wrong within had for its correlate a dimly recognized
righteousness without. So soon as man knows himself as a sinner he knows
something of the holiness of that God whom he has offended. We must take exception
therefore to the remark of Schurman, Belief in God, 231&mdash;<q>The first gods were
probably non-moral beings,</q> for Schurman himself had just said: <q>A God without
moral character is no God at all.</q> Dillmann, in his O. T. Theology, very properly
makes the fundamental thought of O. T. religion, not the unity or the majesty of God,
but his holiness. This alone forms the ethical basis for freedom and law. E. G. Robinson,
Christian Theology&mdash;<q>The one aim of Christianity is personal holiness. But
personal holiness will be the one absorbing and attainable aim of man, only as he
recognizes it to be the one preëminent attribute of God. Hence everything divine is
holy&mdash;the temple, the Scriptures, the Spirit.</q> See articles on Holiness in O. T., by J.
Skinner, and on Holiness in N. T., by G. B. Stevens, in Hastings' Bible Dictionary.
</p>

<p>
The development of the idea of holiness as well as the idea of love was prepared for
before the advent of man. A. H. Strong, Education and Optimism: <q>There was a
time when the past history of life upon the planet seemed one of heartless and cruel
slaughter. The survival of the fittest had for its obverse side the destruction of
myriads. Nature was <q>red in tooth and claw with ravine.</q> But further thought has
shown that this gloomy view results from a partial induction of facts. Paleontological
life was marked not only by a struggle for life, but by a struggle for the life of others.
The beginnings of altruism are to be seen in the instinct of reproduction, and in the
care of offspring. In every lion's den and tiger's lair, in every mother eagle's feeding of
her young, there is a self-sacrifice which faintly shadows forth man's subordination of
personal interests to the interests of others. But in the ages before man can be found
incipient justice as well as incipient love. The struggle for one's own life has its moral
side as well as the struggle for the life of others. The instinct of self-preservation is
the beginning of right, righteousness, justice, and law, on earth. Every creature owes
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
it to God to preserve its own being. So we can find an adumbration of morality even
in the predatory and internecine warfare of the geologic ages. The immanent God
was even then preparing the way for the rights, the dignity, the freedom of humanity.</q>
And, we may add, was preparing the way for the understanding by men of his own
fundamental attribute of holiness. See Henry Drummond, Ascent of Man; Griffith-Jones,
Ascent through Christ.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In further explanation we remark:
</p>

<p>
A. Negatively, that holiness is not
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Justice, or purity demanding purity from creatures. Justice, the
relative or transitive attribute, is indeed the manifestation and expression
of the immanent attribute of holiness, but it is not to be confounded
with it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Quenstedt, Theol., 8:1:34, defines holiness as <q>summa omnisque labis expers to Deo
puritas, puritatem debitam exigens a creaturis</q>&mdash;a definition of transitive holiness, or
justice, rather than of the immanent attribute. <emph>Is. 5:16&mdash;<q>Jehovah of hosts is exalted in justice,
and God the Holy One is sanctified in righteousness</q></emph>&mdash;Justice is simply God's holiness in its judicial
activity. Though holiness is commonly a term of separation and expresses the inherent
opposition of God to all that is sinful, it is also used as a term of union, as in <emph>Lev.
11:44&mdash;<q>be ye holy; for I am holy.</q></emph> When Jesus turned from the young ruler (<emph>Mark 10:23</emph>) he
illustrated the first; <emph>John 8:29</emph> illustrates the second: <emph><q>he that sent me is with me.</q></emph> Lowrie,
Doctrine of St. John, 51-57&mdash;<q><emph><q>God is light</q> (1 John 1:5)</emph> indicates the character of God, moral
purity as revealed, as producing joy and life, as contrasted with doing ill, walking in
darkness, being in a state of perdition.</q>
</p>

<p>
Universal human conscience is itself a revelation of the holiness of God, and the
joining everywhere of suffering with sin is the revelation of God's justice. The wrath,
anger, jealousy of God show that this reaction of God's nature is necessary. God's
nature is itself holy, just, and good. Holiness is not replaced by love, as Ritschl holds,
since there is no self-impartation without self-affirmation. Holiness not simply
<emph>demands</emph> in law, but <emph>imparts</emph> in the Holy Spirit; see Pfleiderer, Grundriss, 79&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>versus</hi>
Ritschl's doctrine that holiness is God's exaltation, and that it includes love; see also
Pfleiderer, Die Ritschlische Theologie, 53-63. Santayana, Sense of Beauty, 69&mdash;<q>If perfection
is the ultimate justification of being, we may understand the ground of the moral
dignity of beauty. Beauty is a pledge of the possible conformity between the soul and
nature, and consequently a ground of faith in the supremacy of the good.</q> We would
regard nature however as merely the symbol and expression of God, and so would regard
beauty as a ground of faith in his supremacy. What Santayana says of beauty is even
more true of holiness. Wherever we see it, we recognize in it a pledge of the possible
conformity between the soul and God, and consequently a ground of faith in the
supremacy of God.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Holiness is not a complex term designating the aggregate of the
divine perfections. On the other hand, the notion of holiness is, both in
Scripture and in Christian experience, perfectly simple, and perfectly distinct
from that of other attributes.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Dick, Theol., 1:275&mdash;Holiness = venerableness, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, <q>no particular attribute, but the
general character of God as resulting from his moral attributes.</q> Wardlaw calls
holiness the union of all the attributes, as pure white light is the union of all the colored
rays of the spectrum (Theology, 1:618-634). So Nitzsch, System of Christ. Doct.,
166; H. W. Beecher: <q>Holiness = wholeness.</q> Approaching this conception is the
definition of W. N. Clarke, Christian Theology, 83&mdash;<q>Holiness is the glorious fulness
of the goodness of God, consistently held as the principle of his own action, and
the standard for his creatures.</q> This implies, according to Dr. Clarke, 1. An inward
character of perfect goodness; 2. That character as the consistent principle of his
own action; 3. The goodness which is the principle of his own action is also the standard
for theirs. In other words, holiness is 1. character; 2. self-consistency; 3. requirement.
We object to this definition that it fails to define. We are not told what is essential
to this character; the definition includes in holiness that which properly belongs
to love; it omits all mention of the most important elements in holiness, namely purity
and right.
</p>

<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>

<p>
A similar lack of clear definition appears in the statement of Mark Hopkins, Law of
Love, 105&mdash;<q>It is this double aspect of love, revealing the whole moral nature, and
turning every way like the flaming sword that kept the way of the tree of life, that is
termed holiness.</q> As has been shown above, holiness is contrasted in Scripture, not
with mere finiteness or littleness or misfortune or poverty or even unreality, but only
with uncleanness and sinfulness. E. G. Robinson, Christ. Theology, 80&mdash;<q>Holiness in
man is the image of God's. But it is clear that holiness in man is not in proportion to
the other perfections of his being&mdash;to his power, his knowledge, his wisdom, though it
is in proportion to his rectitude of will&mdash;and therefore cannot be the sum of all perfections....
To identify holiness with the sum of all perfections is to make it mean
mere completeness of character.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Holiness is not God's self-love, in the sense of supreme regard for
his own interest and happiness. There is no utilitarian element in holiness.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Buddeus, Theol. Dogmat., 2:1:36, defines holiness as God's self-love. But God loves
and affirms self, not as self, but as the holiest. There is no self-seeking in God. Not the
seeking of God's interests, but love for God as holy, is the principle and source of
holiness in man. To call holiness God's self-love is to say that God is holy because of
what he can make by it, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, to deny that holiness has any independent existence. See
Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 1:155.
</p>

<p>
We would not deny, but would rather maintain, that there is a proper self-love
which is not selfishness. This proper self-love, however, is not love at all. It is rather
self-respect, self-preservation, self-vindication, and it constitutes an important characteristic
of holiness. But to define holiness as merely God's love for himself, is to
leave out of the definition the reason for this love in the purity and righteousness of
the divine nature. God's self-respect implies that God respects himself for something
in his own being. What is that something? Is holiness God's <q>moral excellence</q>
(Hopkins), or God's <q>perfect goodness</q> (Clarke)? But what is this moral excellence
or perfect goodness? We have here the method and the end described, but not the
motive and ground. God does not love himself for his love, but he loves himself for
his holiness. Those who maintain that love is self-affirming as well as self-communicating,
and therefore that holiness is God's love for himself, must still admit that this
self-affirming love which is holiness conditions and furnishes the standard for the self-communicating
love which is benevolence.
</p>

<p>
G. B. Stevens, Johannine Theology, 364, tells us that <q>God's righteousness is the self-respect
of perfect love.</q> Miller, Evolution of Love, 53&mdash;<q>Self-love is that kind of
action which in a perfect being actualizes, in a finite being seeks to actualize, a perfect
or ideal self.</q> In other words, love is self-affirmation. But we object that self-love
is not <emph>love</emph> at all, because there is in it no self-communicating. If holiness is in any
sense a form or manifestation of love&mdash;a question which we have yet to consider&mdash;it
is certainly not a unitarian and utilitarian self-love, which would be identical with
selfishness, but rather an affection which implies trinitarian otherness and the maintenance
of self as an ideal object. This appears to be the meaning of Jonathan
Edwards, in his Essay on the Trinity (ed. Fisher), 79&mdash;<q>All love respects another that
is the beloved. By love the apostle certainly means something beside that which is
commonly called self-love: that is very improperly called love, and is a thing of an
exceeding diverse nature from the affection or virtue of love the apostle is speaking
of.</q> Yet we shall see that while Jonathan Edwards denies holiness to be a unitarian
and utilitarian self-love, he regards its very essence to be God's trinitarian love for
himself as a being of perfect moral excellence.
</p>

<p>
Ritschl's lack of trinitarian conviction makes it impossible for him to furnish any
proper ground for either love or holiness in the nature of God. Ritschl holds that
Christ as a person is an end in himself; he realized his own ideal; he developed his own
personality; he reached his own perfection in his work for man; he is not merely a
means toward the end of man's salvation. But when Ritschl comes to his doctrine of
God, he is strangely inconsistent with all this, for he fails to represent God as having
any end in himself, and deals with him simply as a means toward the kingdom of God
as an end. Garvie, Ritschlian Theology, 256, 278, 279, well points out that personality
means self-possession as well as self-communication, distinction from others as well as
union with others. Ritschl does not see that God's love is primarily directed towards
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
his Son, and only secondarily directed toward the Christian community. So he ignores
the immanent Trinity. Before self-communication there must be self-maintenance.
Otherwise God gives up his independence and makes created existence necessary.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Holiness is not identical with, or a manifestation of, love. Since
self-maintenance must precede self-impartation, and since benevolence has
its object, motive, standard and limit in righteousness, holiness the self-affirming
attribute can in no way be resolved into love the self-communicating.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
That holiness is a form of love is the doctrine of Jonathan Edwards, Essay on the
Trinity (ed. Fisher), 97&mdash;<q>'Tis in God's infinite love to himself that his holiness consists.
As all creature holiness is to be resolved into love, as the Scripture teaches us,
so doth the holiness of God himself consist in infinite love to himself. God's holiness
is the infinite beauty and excellence of his nature, and God's excellency consists in his
love to himself.</q> In his treatise on The Nature of Virtue, Jonathan Edwards defines
virtue as regard for being in general. He considers that God's love is first of all
directed toward himself as having the greatest quantity of being, and only secondarily
directed towards his creatures whose quantity of being is infinitesimal as compared
with his. God therefore finds his chief end in himself, and God's self-love is his holiness.
This principle has permeated and dominated subsequent New England theology, from
Samuel Hopkins, Works, 2:9-66, who maintains that holiness = love of being in general,
to Horace Bushnell, Vicarious Sacrifice, who declares: <q>Righteousness, transferred
into a word of the affections, is love; and love, translated back into a word of the conscience,
is righteousness; the eternal law of right is only another conception of the law
of love; the two principles, right and love, appear exactly to measure each other.</q>
So Park, Discourses, 155-180.
</p>

<p>
Similar doctrine is taught by Dorner, Christian Ethics, 73, 93, 184&mdash;<q>Love unites
existence for self with existence for others, self-assertion and self-impartation....
Self-love in God is not selfishness, because he is the original and necessary seat of good
in general, universal good. God guards his honor even in giving himself to others....
Love is the power and desire to be one's self while in another, and while one's self to be
in another who is taken into the heart as an end.... I am to love my neighbor only
as myself.... Virtue however requires not only good will, but the willing of the right
thing.</q> So Newman Smyth, Christian Ethics, 226-239, holds that 1. Love is self-affirmation.
Hence he maintains that holiness or self-respect is involved in love. Righteousness
is not an independent excellence to be contrasted with or put in opposition to
benevolence; it is an essential part of love. 2. Love is self-impartation. The only
limit is ethical. Here is an ever deepening immanence, yet always some transcendence
of God, for God cannot deny himself. 3. Love is self-finding in another. Vicariousness
belongs to love. We reply to both Dorner and Smyth that their acknowledgment
that love has its condition, limit, motive, object and standard, shows that there is a
principle higher than love, and which regulates love. This principle is recognized as
ethical. It is identical with the right. God cannot deny himself because he is fundamentally
the right. This self-affirmation is holiness, and holiness cannot be a part of
love, or a form of love, because it conditions and dominates love. To call it benevolence
is to ignore its majestic distinctness and to imperil its legitimate supremacy.
</p>

<p>
God must first maintain his own being before he can give to another, and this self-maintenance
must have its reason and motive in the worth of that which is maintained.
Holiness cannot be love, because love is irrational and capricious except as it
has a standard by which it is regulated, and this standard cannot be itself love, but
must be holiness. We agree with Clarke, Christian Theology, 92, that <q>love is the
desire to impart holiness.</q> Love is a means to holiness, and holiness is therefore the
supreme good and something higher than mere love. It is not true, <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>, that
holiness is the desire to impart love, or that holiness is a means to love. Instead then
of saying, with Clarke, that <q>holiness is central in God, but love is central in holiness,</q>
we should prefer to say: <q>Love is central in God, but holiness is central in love,</q>
though in this case we should use the term love as including self-love. It is still better
not to use the word love at all as referring to God's regard for himself. In ordinary
usage, love means only regard for another and self-communication to that other. To
embrace in it God's self-affirmation is to misinterpret holiness and to regard it as a
means to an end, instead of making it what it really is, the superior object, and the
regulative principle, of love.
</p>

<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>

<p>
That which lays down the norm or standard for love must be the superior of love.
When we forget that <emph><q>Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne</q> (Ps. 97:2)</emph>, we lose
one of the chief landmarks of Christian doctrine and involve ourselves in a mist of
error. <emph>Rev. 4:3&mdash;<q>there was a rainbow round about the throne</q></emph> = in the midst of the rainbow of
pardon and peace there is a throne of holiness and judgment. In <emph>Mat. 6:9, 10, <q>Thy kingdom
come</q></emph> is not the first petition, but rather, <emph><q>Hallowed be thy name.</q></emph> It is a false idea of the divine
simplicity which would reduce the attributes to one. Self-assertion is not a form of
self-impartation. Not sentiency, a state of the sensibility, even though it be the
purest benevolence, is the fundamental thing, but rather activity of will and a
right direction of that will. Hodge, Essays, 133-136, 262-273, shows well that holy
love is a love controlled by holiness. Holiness is not a mere means to happiness.
To be happy is not the ultimate reason for being holy. Right and wrong are not
matters of profit and loss. To be told that God is only benevolence, and that he
punishes only when the happiness of the universe requires it, destroys our whole
allegiance to God and does violence to the constitution of our nature.
</p>

<p>
That God is only love has been called <q>the doctrine of the papahood of God.</q>
God is <q>a summer ocean of kindliness, never agitated by storms</q> (Dale, Ephesians,
59). But Jesus gives us the best idea of God, and in him we find, not only
pity, but at times moral indignation. <emph>John 17:11&mdash;<q>Holy Father</q></emph> = more than love. Love
can be exercised by God only when it is right love. Holiness is the track on which
the engine of love must run. The track cannot be the engine. If either includes
the other, then it is holiness that includes love, since holiness is the maintenance
of God's perfection, and perfection involves love. He that is holy affirms himself
also as the perfect love. If love were fundamental, there would be nothing to give,
and so love would be vain and worthless. There can be no giving of self, without
a previous self-affirming. God is not holy because he loves, but he loves because
he is holy. Love cannot direct itself; it is under bonds to holiness. Justice is not
dependent on love for its right to be. Stephen G. Barnes: <q>Mere good will is not
the sole content of the law; it is insufficient in times of fiery trial; it is inadequate
as a basis for retribution. Love needs justice, and justice needs love; both
are commanded in God's law and are perfectly revealed in God's character.</q>
</p>

<p>
There may be a friction between a man's two hands, and there may be a conflict
between a man's conscience and his will, between his intellect and his affection.
Force is God's energy under resistance, the resistance as well as the energy being
his. So, upon occasion of man's sin, holiness and love in God become opposite poles
or forces. The first and most serious effect of sin is not its effect upon man, but
its effect upon God. Holiness necessarily requires suffering, and love endures it.
This eternal suffering of God on account of sin is the atonement, and the incarnate
Christ only shows what has been in the heart of God from the beginning. To make
holiness a form of love is really to deny its existence, and with this to deny that any
atonement is necessary for man's salvation. If holiness is the same as love, how
is it that the classic world, that knew of God's holiness, did not also know of his
love? The ethics here reminds one of Abraham Lincoln's meat broth that was made
of the shadow of a pigeon that died of starvation. Holiness that is only good will
is not holiness at all, for it lacks the essential elements of purity and righteousness.
</p>

<p>
At the railway switching grounds east of Rochester, there is a man whose duty it is
to move a bar of iron two or three inches to the left or to the right. So he determines
whether a train shall go toward New York or toward Washington, toward New Orleans
or San Francisco. Our conclusion at this point in our theology will similarly determine
what our future system will be. The principle that holiness is a manifestation of
love, or a form of benevolence, leads to the conclusions that happiness is the only good,
and the only end; that law is a mere expedient for the securing of happiness; that penalty
is simply deterrent or reformatory in its aim; that no atonement needs to be offered
to God for human sin; that eternal retribution cannot be vindicated, since there is no
hope of reform. This view ignores the testimony of conscience and of Scripture that
sin is intrinsically ill-deserving, and must be punished on that account, not because
punishment will work good to the universe,&mdash;indeed, it could not work good to the
universe, unless it were just and right in itself. It ignores the fact that mercy is
optional with God, while holiness is invariable; that punishment is many times
traced to God's holiness, but never to God's love; that God is not simply love but
light&mdash;moral light&mdash;and therefore is <emph><q>a consuming fire</q> (Heb. 12:29)</emph> to all iniquity. Love
chastens (<emph>Heb. 12:6</emph>), but only holiness punishes (<emph>Jer. 10:24&mdash;<q>correct me, but in measure; not in
thine anger</q></emph>; <emph>Ez. 28:22&mdash;<q>I shall have executed judgments in her, and shall be sanctified in her</q></emph>; <emph>36:21, 22</emph>&mdash;in
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
judgment <emph><q>I do not this for your sake, but for my holy name</q></emph>; <emph>1 John 1:5&mdash;<q>God is light, and in him is
no darkness</q></emph>&mdash;moral darkness; <emph>Rev. 15:1, 4&mdash;<q>the wrath of God ... thou only art holy ... thy righteous
acts have been made manifest</q></emph>; <emph>16:5&mdash;<q>righteous art thou ... because thou didst thus judge</q></emph>; <emph>19:2&mdash;<q>true
and righteous are his judgments; for he hath judged the great harlot</q>).</emph> See Hovey, God with Us, 187-221;
Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 2:80-82; Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 154, 155,
346-353; Lange, Pos. Dogmatik, 203.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. Positively, that holiness is
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Purity of substance.&mdash;In God's moral nature, as necessarily acting,
there are indeed the two elements of willing and being. But the passive
logically precedes the active; being comes before willing; God <emph>is</emph> pure
before he <emph>wills</emph> purity. Since purity, however, in ordinary usage is a
negative term and means only freedom from stain or wrong, we must
include in it also the positive idea of moral rightness. God is holy in that
he is the source and standard of the right.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 80&mdash;<q>Holiness is moral purity, not only in the
sense of absence of all moral stain, but of complacency in all moral good.</q> Shedd,
Dogm. Theology, 1:362&mdash;<q>Holiness in God is conformity to his own perfect nature.
The only rule for the divine will is the divine reason; and the divine reason prescribes
everything that is befitting an infinite Being to do. God is not under law, nor above
law. He <emph>is</emph> law. He is righteous by nature and necessity.... God is the source and
author of law for all moral beings.</q> We may better Shedd's definition by saying that
holiness is that attribute in virtue of which God's being and God's will eternally conform
to each other. In thus maintaining that holy being logically precedes holy
willing, we differ from the view of Lotze, Philos. of Religion, 139&mdash;<q>Such will of God
no more follows from his nature as secondary to it, or precedes it as primary to it than,
in motion, direction can be antecedent or subsequent to velocity.</q> Bowne, Philos. of
Theism, 16&mdash;<q>God's nature = a fixed law of activity or mode of manifestation.... But
laws of thought are no limitation, because they are simply modes of thought-activity.
They do not <emph>rule</emph> intellect, but only express what intellect <emph>is</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
In spite of these utterances of Lotze and of Bowne, we must maintain that, as truth
of being logically precedes truth of knowing, and as a loving nature precedes loving
emotions, so purity of substance precedes purity of will. The opposite doctrine leads
to such utterances as that of Whedon (On the Will, 316): <q>God is holy, in that he freely
chooses to make his own happiness in eternal right. Whether he could not make himself
equally happy in wrong is more than we can say.... Infinite wisdom and infinite
holiness consist in, and result from, God's volitions eternally.</q> Whedon therefore
believes, not in God's <emph>unchangeableness</emph>, but in God's <emph>unchangingness</emph>. He cannot say
whether motives may not at some time prove strongest for divine apostasy to evil.
The essential holiness of God affords no basis for certainty. Here we have to rely on
our faith, more than on the object of faith; see H. B. Smith, Review of Whedon, in
Faith and Philosophy, 355-399. As we said with regard to truth, so here we say with
regard to holiness, that to make holiness a matter of mere will, instead of regarding it
as a characteristic of God's being, is to deny that anything is holy in itself. If God
can make impurity to be purity, then God in himself is indifferent to purity or impurity,
and he ceases therefore to be God. Robert Browning, A Soul's Tragedy, 223&mdash;<q>I
trust in God&mdash;the Right shall be the Right And other than the Wrong, while He
endures.</q> P. S. Moxom: <q>Revelation is a disclosure of the divine righteousness. We
do not add to the thought when we say that it is also a disclosure of the divine love,
for love is a manifestation or realization of that rightness of relations which righteousness
is.</q> H. B. Smith, System, 223-231&mdash;<q>Virtue = love for both happiness and holiness,
yet holiness as ultimate,&mdash;love to the highest Person and to his ends and objects.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Energy of will.&mdash;This purity is not simply a passive and dead quality;
it is the attribute of a personal being; it is penetrated and pervaded
by will. Holiness is the free moral movement of the Godhead.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
As there is a higher Mind than our mind, and a greater Heart than our heart, so there
is a grander Will than our will. Holiness contains this element of will, although it is a
will which expresses nature, instead of causing nature. It is not a still and moveless
purity, like the whiteness of the new-fallen snow, or the stainless blue of the summer
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
sky. It is the most tremendous of energies, in unsleeping movement. It is <emph><q>a glassy sea</q>
(Rev. 15:2)</emph>, but <emph><q>a glassy sea mingled with fire.</q></emph> A. J. Gordon: <q>Holiness is not a dead-white
purity, the perfection of the faultless marble statue. Life, as well as purity, enters
into the idea of holiness. They who are <q>without fault before the throne</q> are they
who <q>follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth</q>&mdash;holy activity attending and expressing
their holy state.</q> Martensen, Christian Ethics, 62, 63&mdash;<q>God is the perfect unity
of the ethically necessary and the ethically free</q>; <q>God cannot do otherwise than will
his own essential nature.</q> See Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 141; and on the
Holiness of Christ, see Godet, Defence of the Christian Faith, 203-241.
</p>

<p>
The centre of personality is will. Knowing has its end in feeling, and feeling has its
end in willing. Hence I must make feeling subordinate to willing, and happiness to
righteousness. I must will with God and for God, and must use all my influence over
others to make them like God in holiness. William James, Will to Believe, 123&mdash;<q>Mind
must first get its impression from the object; then define what that object is and what
active measures its presence demands; and finally react.... All faiths and philosophies,
moods and systems, subserve and pass into a third stage, the stage of action.</q>
What is true of man is even more true of God. All the wills of men combined, aye,
even the whole moving energy of humanity in all climes and ages, is as nothing compared
with the extent and intensity of God's willing. The whole momentum of God's
being is behind moral law. That law is his self-expression. His beneficent yet also
his terrible arm is ever defending and enforcing it. God must maintain his holiness,
for this is his very Godhead. If he did not maintain it, love would have nothing to
give away, or to make others partakers of.
</p>

<p>
Does God will the good because it is the good, or is the good good because God wills
it? In the former case, there would seem to be a good above God; in the latter case,
good is something arbitrary and changeable. Kaftan, Dogmatik, 186, 187, says that
neither of these is true; he holds that there is no <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> good before the willing of it,
and he also holds that will without direction is not will; the good is good for God, not
<emph>before</emph>, but <emph>in</emph>, his self-determination. Dorner, System Doctrine, 1:432, holds on the
contrary that both these are true, because God has no mere simple form of being,
whether necessary or free, but rather a manifoldly diverse being, absolutely correlated
however, and reciprocally conditioning itself,&mdash;that is, a trinitarian being, both necessary
and free. We side with Dorner here, and claim that the belief that God's will is
the executive of God's being is necessary to a correct ethics and to a correct theology.
Celsus justified polytheism by holding that whatever is a part of God reveals God,
serves God, and therefore may rationally be worshiped. Christianity he excepted
from this wide toleration, because it worshiped a jealous God who was not content
to be one of many. But this jealousy really signifies that God is a Being to whom
moral distinctions are real. The God of Celsus, the God of pantheism, is not jealous,
because he is not the Holy One, but simply the Absolute. The category of the ethical is
merged in the category of being; see Bruce, Apologetics, 16. The great lack of modern
theology is precisely this ethical lack; holiness is merged in benevolence; there is no
proper recognition of God's righteousness. <emph>John 17:25&mdash;<q>O righteous Father, the world knew thee
not</q></emph>&mdash;is a text as true to-day as in Jesus' time. See Issel, Begriff der Heiligkeit in N. T.,
41, 84, who defines holiness in God as <q>the ethical perfection of God in its exaltation
above all that is sinful,</q> and holiness in men as <q>the condition corresponding to that
of God, in which man keeps himself pure from sin.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Self-affirmation.&mdash;Holiness is God's self-willing. His own purity is
the supreme object of his regard and maintenance. God is holy, in that
his infinite moral excellence affirms and asserts itself as the highest possible
motive and end. Like truth and love, this attribute can be understood
only in the light of the doctrine of the Trinity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Holiness is purity willing itself. We have an analogy in man's duty of self-preservation,
self-respect, self-assertion. Virtue is bound to maintain and defend itself, as in
the case of Job. In his best moments, the Christian feels that purity is not simply the
negation of sin, but the affirmation of an inward and divine principle of righteousness.
Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 1:137&mdash;<q>Holiness is the perfect agreement of
the divine willing with the divine being; for as the personal creature is holy when it
wills and determines itself as God wills, so is God the holy one because he wills himself
as what he is (or, to be what he is). In virtue of this attribute, God excludes from
himself everything that contradicts his nature, and affirms himself in his absolutely
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
good being&mdash;his being like himself.</q> Tholuck on Romans, 5th ed., 151&mdash;<q>The term
holiness should be used to indicate a relation of God to himself. That is holy which,
undisturbed from without, is wholly like itself.</q> Dorner, System of Doctrine, 1:456&mdash;<q>It
is the part of goodness to protect goodness.</q> We shall see, when we consider the
doctrine of the Trinity, that that doctrine has close relations to the doctrine of the
immanent attributes. It is in the Son that God has a perfect object of will, as well as
of knowledge and love.
</p>

<p>
The object of God's willing in eternity past can be nothing outside of himself. It
must be the highest of all things. We see what it must be, only when we remember
that the right is the unconditional imperative of our moral nature. Since we are made
in his image we must conclude that God eternally wills righteousness. Not all God's
acts are acts of love, but all are acts of holiness. The self-respect, self-preservation,
self-affirmation, self-assertion, self-vindication, which we call God's holiness, is only
faintly reflected in such utterances as <emph>Job 27:5, 6&mdash;<q>Till I die I will not put away mine integrity from
me. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go</q></emph>; <emph>31:37&mdash;<q>I would declare unto him the number of my steps;
as a prince would I go near unto him.</q></emph> The fact that the Spirit of God is denominated the Holy
Spirit should teach us what is God's essential nature, and the requisition that we
should be holy as he is holy should teach us what is the true standard of human duty
and object of human ambition. God's holiness moreover, since it is self-affirmation,
furnishes the guarantee that God's love will not fail to secure its end, and that all
things will serve his purpose. <emph>Rom. 11:36&mdash;<q>For of him, and through him, and unto him, are all things.
To him be the glory for ever. Amen.</q></emph> On the whole subject of Holiness, as an attribute of God,
see A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion, 188-200, and Christ in Creation, 388-405; Delitzsch,
art. Heiligkeit, in Herzog, Realencyclop.; Baudissin, Begriff der Heiligkeit im
A. T.,&mdash;synopsis in Studien und Kritiken, 1880:169; Robertson Smith, Prophets of
Israel, 224-234; E. B. Coe, in Presb. and Ref. Rev., Jan. 1890:42-47; and articles on Holiness
in O. T., and Holiness in N. T., in Hastings' Bible Dictionary.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VI. Relative or Transitive Attributes.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>First Division.&mdash;Attributes having relation to Time and Space.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Eternity.</head>

<p>
By this we mean that God's nature (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) is without beginning or end; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>)
is free from all succession of time; and (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) contains in itself the cause of
time.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Deut. 32:40&mdash;<q>For I lift up my hand to heaven, And say, As I live forever....</q></emph>; <emph>Ps. 90:2&mdash;<q>Before the mountains ...
from everlasting ... thou art God</q></emph>; <emph>102:27&mdash;<q>thy years shall have no end</q></emph>; <emph>Is. 41:4&mdash;<q>I Jehovah,
the first, and with the last</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 2:7</emph>&mdash;πρὸ τῶν αἰώνων&mdash;<emph><q>before the worlds</q></emph> or <emph><q>ages</q></emph> = πρὸ καταβολῆς
κόσμου&mdash;<emph><q>before the foundation of the world</q> (Eph. 1:4)</emph>. <emph>1 Tim. 1:17</emph>&mdash;Βασιλεῖ τῶν αἰώνων&mdash;<emph><q>King of the
ages</q></emph> (so also <emph>Rev. 15:8</emph>). <emph>1 Tim. 6:16&mdash;<q>who only hath immortality.</q></emph> <emph>Rev. 1:8&mdash;<q>the Alpha and the
Omega.</q></emph> Dorner: <q>We must not make Kronos (time) and Uranos (space) earlier divinities
before God.</q> They are among the <emph><q>all things</q></emph> that were <emph><q>made by him </q> (John 1:3)</emph>. Yet
time and space are not <emph>substances</emph>; neither are they <emph>attributes</emph> (qualities of substance);
they are rather <emph>relations</emph> of finite existence. (Porter, Human Intellect, 568, prefers to
call time and space <q><emph>correlates</emph> to beings and events.</q>) With finite existence they
come into being; they are not mere regulative conceptions of our minds; they exist
objectively, whether we perceive them or not. Ladd: <q>Time is the mental presupposition
of the duration of events and of objects. Time is not an entity, or it would be
necessary to suppose some other time in which it endures. We think of space and
time as unconditional, because they furnish the conditions of our knowledge. The age
of a son is conditioned on the age of his father. The conditions themselves cannot be
conditioned. Space and time are mental forms, but not only that. There is an extra-mental
something in the case of space and time, as in the case of sound.</q>
</p>

<p>
<emph>Ex. 3:14&mdash;<q>I am</q></emph>&mdash;involves eternity. <emph>Ps. 102:12-14&mdash;<q>But thou, O Jehovah, wilt abide forever....
Thou wilt arise, and have mercy upon Zion; for it is time to have pity upon her.... For thy servants ... have
pity upon her dust</q></emph> = because God is eternal, he will have compassion upon Zion: he will
do this, for even we, her children, love her very dust. <emph>Jude 25&mdash;<q>glory, majesty, dominion and
power, before all time, and now, and for evermore.</q></emph> Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 1:165&mdash;<q>God is <emph><q>King
of the æons</q> (1 Tim. 1:17)</emph>, because he distinguishes, in his thinking, his eternal inner essence
from his changeable working in the world. He is not merged in the process.</q> Edwards
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
the younger describes timelessness as <q>the immediate and invariable possession of
the whole unlimited life together and at once.</q> Tyler, Greek Poets, 148&mdash;<q>The
heathen gods had only existence without end. The Greeks seem never to have conceived
of existence without beginning.</q> On precognition as connected with the so-called
future already existing, and on apparent time progression as a subjective human
sensation and not inherent in the universe as it exists in an infinite Mind, see Myers,
Human Personality, 2:262 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Tennyson, Life, 1:322&mdash;<q>For was and is and will be are
but is: And all creation is one act at once, The birth of light; but we that are not all,
As parts, can see but parts, now this, now that, And live perforce from thought to
thought, and make The act a phantom of succession: there Our weakness somehow
shapes the shadow, Time.</q>
</p>

<p>
Augustine: <q>Mundus non in tempore, sed cum tempore, factus est.</q> There is no
meaning to the question: Why did creation take place when it did rather than earlier?
or the question: What was God doing before creation? These questions presuppose
an independent time in which God created&mdash;a time before time. On the other hand,
creation did not take place at any time, but God gave both the world and time their
existence. Royce, World and Individual, 2:111-115&mdash;<q>Time is the form of the will,
as space is the form of the intellect (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> 124, 133). Time runs only in one direction
(unlike space), toward fulfilment of striving or expectation. In pursuing its goals,
the self lives in time. Every <emph>now</emph> is also a succession, as is illustrated in any
melody. To God the universe is <q>totum simul</q>, as to us any succession is one whole.
233&mdash;Death is a change in the time-span&mdash;the minimum of time in which a succession
can appear as a completed whole. To God <emph><q>a thousand years</q></emph> are <emph><q>as one day</q> (2 Pet. 3:8)</emph>.
419&mdash;God, In his totality as the Absolute Being, is conscious not, <emph>in</emph> time, but <emph>of</emph> time,
and of all that infinite time contains. In time there follow, in their sequence, the
chords of his endless symphony. For him is this whole symphony of life at once....
You unite present, past and future in a single consciousness whenever you hear any
three successive words, for one is past, another is present, at the same time that a
third is future. So God unites in timeless perception the whole succession of finite
events.... The single notes are not lost in the melody. You are in God, but you are
not lost in God.</q> Mozart, quoted in Wm. James, Principles of Psychology, 1:255&mdash;<q>All
the inventing and making goes on in me as in a beautiful strong dream. But the best
of all is <hi rend='italic'>the hearing of it all at once</hi>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Eternity is infinity in its relation to time. It implies that God's nature
is not subject to the law of time. God is not in time. It is more correct
to say that time is in God. Although there is logical succession in God's
thoughts, there is no chronological succession.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Time is duration measured by successions. Duration without succession would still
be duration, though it would be immeasurable. Reid, Intellectual Powers, essay 3,
chap. 5&mdash;<q>We may measure duration by the succession of thoughts in the mind, as we
measure length by inches or feet, but the notion or idea of duration must be antecedent
to the mensuration of it, as the notion of length is antecedent to its being measured.</q>
God is not under the law of time. Solly, The Will, 254&mdash;<q>God looks through
time as we look through space.</q> Murphy, Scientific Bases, 90&mdash;<q>Eternity is not, as
men believe, Before and after us, an endless line. No, 'tis a circle. Infinitely great&mdash;All
the circumference with creations thronged: God at the centre dwells, beholding all.
And as we move in this eternal round, The finite portion which alone we see Behind us,
is the past; what lies before We call the future. But to him who dwells Far at the
centre, equally remote From every point of the circumference, Both are alike, the
future and the past.</q> Vaughan (1655): <q>I saw Eternity the other night. Like a great
ring of pure and endless light. And calm as it was bright; and round beneath it Time
in hours, days, years, Driven by the spheres, Like a vast shadow moved, in which the
world And all her train were hurled.</q>
</p>

<p>
We cannot have derived from experience our idea of eternal duration in the past,
for experience gives us only duration that has had beginning. The idea of duration as
without beginning must therefore be given us by intuition. Case, Physical Realism,
379, 380&mdash;<q>Time is the continuance, or continual duration, of the universe.</q> Bradley,
Appearance and Reality, 39&mdash;Consider time as a stream&mdash;under a spatial form: <q>If
you take time as a relation between units without duration, then the whole time has
no duration, and is not time at all. But if you give duration to the whole time, then at
once the units themselves are found to possess it, and they cease to be units.</q> The
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
<emph>now</emph> is not time, unless it turns past into future, and this is a process. The now then
consists of nows, and these nows are undiscoverable. The unit is nothing but its own
relation to something beyond, something not discoverable. Time therefore is not real,
but is appearance.
</p>

<p>
John Caird, Fund. Ideas, 1:185&mdash;<q>That which grasps and correlates objects in space
cannot itself be one of the things of space; that which apprehends and connects events
as succeeding each other in time must itself stand above the succession or stream of
events. In being able to measure them, it cannot be flowing with them. There could
not be for self-consciousness any such thing as time, if it were not, in one aspect of it,
above time, if it did not belong to an order which is or has in it an element which is
eternal.... As taken up into thought, succession is not successive.</q> A. H. Strong,
Historical Discourse, May 9, 1900&mdash;<q>God is above space and time, and we are in God.
We mark the passage of time, and we write our histories. But we can do this, only
because in our highest being we do not belong to space and time, but have in us a bit
of eternity. John Caird tells us that we could not perceive the flowing of the stream
if we were ourselves a part of the current; only as we have our feet planted on solid
rock, can we observe that the water rushes by. We belong to God; we are akin to
God; and while the world passes away and the lust thereof, he that doeth the will of
God abideth forever.</q> J. Estlin Carpenter and P. H. Wicksteed, Studies in Theology,
10&mdash;<q>Dante speaks of God as him in whom <q>every <emph>where</emph> and every <emph>when</emph> are focused
in a point</q>, that is, to whom every season is <emph>now</emph> and every place is <emph>here</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Amiel's Journal: <q>Time is the supreme illusion. It is the inner prism by which we
decompose being and life, the mode by which we perceive successively what is simultaneous
in idea.... Time is the successive dispersion of being, just as speech is the
successive analysis of an intuition, or of an act of the will. In itself it is relative and
negative, and it disappears within the absolute Being.... Time and space are fragments
of the Infinite for the use of finite creatures. God permits them that he may
not be alone. They are the mode under which creatures are possible and conceivable....
If the universe subsists, it is because the eternal Mind loves to perceive its own
content, in all its wealth and expression, especially in its stages of preparation....
The radiations of our mind are imperfect reflections from the great show of fireworks
set in motion by Brahma, and great art is great only because of its conformities with
the divine order&mdash;with that which is.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Yet we are far from saying that time, now that it exists, has no objective
reality to God. To him, past, present, and future are <q>one eternal now,</q>
not in the sense that there is no distinction between them, but only in the
sense that he sees past and future as vividly as he sees the present. With
creation time began, and since the successions of history are veritable successions,
he who sees according to truth must recognize them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Thomas Carlyle calls God <q>the Eternal Now.</q> Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 30&mdash;<q>God
is not contemptuous of time.... One day is with the Lord as a thousand years.
He values the infinitesimal in time, even as he does in space. Hence the patience,
the long-suffering, the expectation, of God.</q> We are reminded of the inscription
on the sun-dial, in which it is said of the hours: <q>Pereunt et imputantur</q>&mdash;<q>They
pass by, and they are charged to our account.</q> A certain preacher remarked on the
wisdom of God which has so arranged that the moments of time come successively and
not simultaneously, and thus prevent infinite confusion! Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:344,
illustrates God's eternity by the two ways in which a person may see a procession: first
from a doorway in the street through which the procession is passing; and secondly,
from the top of a steeple which commands a view of the whole procession at the
same instant.
</p>

<p>
S. E. Meze, quoted in Royce, Conception of God, 40&mdash;<q>As if all of us were cylinders,
with their ends removed, moving through the waters of some placid lake. To the cylinders
the waters seem to move. What has passed is a memory, what is to come
is doubtful. But the lake knows that all the water is equally real, and that it is quiet,
immovable, unruffled. Speaking technically, time is no reality. Things <emph>seem</emph> past and
future, and, in a sense, non-existent to us, but, in fact, they are just as genuinely real
as the present is.</q> Yet even here there is an order. You cannot play a symphony
backward and have music. This qualification at least must be put upon the words
of Berkeley; <q>A succession of ideas I take to <emph>constitute</emph> time, and not to be only
the sensible measure thereof, as Mr. Locke and others think.</q>
</p>

<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>

<p>
Finney, quoted in Bib. Sac., Oct. 1877:722&mdash;<q>Eternity to us means all past, present
and future duration. But to God it means only now. Duration and space, as they
respect his existence, mean infinitely different things from what they do when they
respect our existence. God's existence and his acts, as they respect finite existence,
have relation to time and space. But as they respect his own existence, everything is
<emph>here</emph> and <emph>now</emph>. With respect to all finite existences, God can say: I was, I am, I shall be,
I will do; but with respect to his own existence, all that he can say is: I am, I do.</q>
</p>

<p>
Edwards the younger, Works, 1:386, 387&mdash;<q>There is no succession in the divine mind;
therefore no new operations take place. All the divine acts are from eternity, nor is
there any time with God. The <emph>effects</emph> of these divine acts do indeed all take place in
time and in a succession. If it should be said that on this supposition the effects take
place not till long after the acts by which they are produced, I answer that they do so
in our view, but not in the view of God. With him there is no time; no before or after
with respect to time: nor has time any existence in the divine mind, or in the nature of
things independently of the minds and perceptions of creatures; but it depends on the
succession of those perceptions.</q> We must qualify this statement of the younger
Edwards by the following from Julius Müller: <q>If God's working can have no relation
to time, then all bonds of union between God and the world are snapped asunder.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is an interesting question whether the human spirit is capable of timeless existence,
and whether the conception of time is purely physical. In dreams we seem to lose
sight of succession; in extreme pain an age is compressed into a minute. Does this
throw light upon the nature of prophecy? Is the soul of the prophet rapt into God's
timeless existence and vision? It is doubtful whether <emph>Rev. 10:6&mdash;<q>there shall be time no
longer</q></emph> can be relied upon to prove the affirmative; for the Rev. Vers. marg. and the
American Revisers translate <emph><q>there shall be delay no longer.</q></emph> Julius Müller, Doct. Sin, 2:147&mdash;<q>All
self-consciousness is a victory over time.</q> So with memory; see Dorner, Glaubenslehre,
1:471. On <q>the death-vision of one's whole existence,</q> see Frances Kemble
Butler's experience in Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:351&mdash;<q>Here there is succession and series,
only so exceedingly rapid as to seem simultaneous.</q> This rapidity however is so great
as to show that each man can at the last be judged in an instant. On space and time as
unlimited, see Porter, Hum. Intellect, 564-566. On the conception of eternity, see Mansel,
Lectures, Essays and Reviews, 111-126, and Modern Spiritualism, 255-292; New
Englander, April, 1875: art. on the Metaphysical Idea of Eternity. For practical lessons
from the Eternity of God, see Park, Discourses, 137-154; Westcott, Some Lessons
of the Rev. Vers., (Pott, N. Y., 1897), 187&mdash;with comments on αἰῶνες in <emph>Eph. 3:21</emph>, <emph>Heb. 11:3</emph>,
<emph>Rev. 4</emph>; <emph>10, 11</emph>&mdash;<q>the universe under the aspect of time.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Immensity.</head>

<p>
By this we mean that God's nature (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) is without extension; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) is subject
to no limitations of space; and (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) contains in itself the cause of space.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>1 Kings 8:27&mdash;<q>behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee.</q></emph> Space is a creation of
God; <emph>Rom. 8:39&mdash;<q>nor height nor depth, nor any other creature.</q></emph> Zahn, Bib. Dogmatik, 149&mdash;<q>Scripture
does not teach the immanence of God in the world, but the immanence of the world
in God.</q> Dante does not put God, but Satan at the centre; and Satan, being at the
centre, is crushed with the whole weight of the universe. God is the Being who
encompasses all. All things exist in him. E. G. Robinson: <q>Space is a relation; God is
the author of relations and of our modes of thought; therefore God is the author of
space. Space conditions our thought, but it does not condition God's thought.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jonathan Edwards: <q>Place itself is mental, and within and without are mental conceptions....
When I say the material universe exists only in the mind, I mean that it
is absolutely dependent on the conception of the mind for its existence, and does not
exist as spirits do, whose existence does not consist in, nor in dependence on, the conception
of other minds.</q> H. M. Stanley, on Space and Science, in Philosophical
Rev., Nov. 1898:615&mdash;<q>Space is not full of things, but things are spaceful.... Space
is a form of dynamic appearance.</q> Bradley carries the ideality of space to an extreme,
when, in his Appearance and Reality, 35-38, he tells us: Space is not a mere relation,
for it has parts, and what can be the parts of a relation? But space is nothing but
a relation, for it is lengths of lengths of&mdash;nothing that we can find. We can find no
terms either inside or outside. Space, to be space, must have space outside itself.
Bradley therefore concludes that space is not reality but only appearance.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>

<p>
Immensity is infinity in its relation to space. God's nature is not subject
to the law of space. God is not in space. It is more correct to say that
space is in God. Yet space has an objective reality to God. With creation
space began to be, and since God sees according to truth, he recognizes
relations of space in his creation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Many of the remarks made in explanation of time apply equally to space. Space is
not a substance nor an attribute, but a relation. It exists so soon as extended matter
exists, and exists as its necessary condition, whether our minds perceive it or not. Reid,
Intellectual Powers, essay 2, chap. 9&mdash;<q>Space is not so properly an object of sense, as
a necessary concomitant of the objects of sight and touch.</q> When we see or touch
body, we get the idea of space in which the body exists, but the idea of space is not furnished
by the sense; it is an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> cognition of the reason. Experience furnishes
the occasion of its evolution, but the mind evolves the conception by its own native
energy.
</p>

<p>
Anselm, Proslogion, 19&mdash;<q>Nothing contains thee, but thou containest all things.</q>
Yet it is not precisely accurate to say that space is in God, for this expression seems to
intimate that God is a greater space which somehow includes the less. God is rather
unspatial and is the Lord of space. The notion that space and the divine immensity
are identical leads to a materialistic conception of God. Space is not an attribute of
God, as Clarke maintained, and no argument for the divine existence can be constructed
from this premise (see pages 85, 86). Martineau, Types, 1:138, 139, 170&mdash;<q>Malebranche
said that God is the place of all spirits, as space is the place of all bodies.... Descartes
held that there is no such thing as empty space. <emph>Nothing</emph> cannot possibly have
extension. Wherever extension is, there must be <emph>something</emph> extended. Hence the doctrine
of a <foreign rend='italic'>plenum</foreign>, A <emph>vacuum</emph> is inconceivable.</q> Lotze, Outlines of Metaphysics, 87&mdash;<q>According
to the ordinary view ... space <emph>exists</emph>, and things exist <emph>in it</emph>; according
to our view, only things exist, and <emph>between them</emph> nothing exists, but space exists <emph>in them</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Case, Physical Realism, 379, 380&mdash;<q>Space is the continuity, or continuous extension,
of the universe as one substance.</q> Ladd: <q>Is space extended? Then it must be
extended in some other space. That other space is the space we are talking about.
Space then is not an entity, but a mental presupposition of the existence of extended
substance. Space and time are neither finite nor infinite. Space has neither circumference
nor centre,&mdash;its centre would be everywhere. We cannot <emph>imagine</emph> space at all.
It is simply a precondition of mind enabling us to perceive things.</q> In Bib. Sac., 1890:415-444,
art.: Is Space a Reality? Prof. Mead opposes the doctrine that space is purely
subjective, as taught by Bowne; also the doctrine that space is a certain order of relations
among realities; that space is nothing apart from things; but that things, when
they exist, exist in certain relations, and that the sum, or system, of these relations
constitutes space.
</p>

<p>
We prefer the view of Bowne, Metaphysics, 127, 137, 143, that <q>Space is the form of
objective experience, and is nothing in abstraction from that experience.... It is a
form of intuition, and not a mode of existence. According to this view, things are
not in space and space-relations, but appear to be. In themselves they are essentially
non-spatial; but by their interactions with one another, and with the mind, they give
rise to the appearance of a world of extended things in a common space. Space-predicates,
then, belong to phenomena only, and not to things-in-themselves.... Apparent
reality exists spatially; but proper ontological reality exists spacelessly and without
spatial predicates.</q> For the view that space is relative, see also Cocker, Theistic Conception
of the World, 66-96; Calderwood, Philos. of the Infinite, 331-335. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see
Porter, Human Intellect, 662; Hazard, Letters on Causation in Willing, appendix; Bib.
Sac., Oct. 1877:723; Gear, in Bap. Rev., July, 1880:434; Lowndes, Philos. of Primary
Beliefs, 144-161.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Second Division.&mdash;Attributes having relation to Creation.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Omnipresence.</head>

<p>
By this we mean that God, in the totality of his essence, without diffusion
or expansion, multiplication or division, penetrates and fills the
universe in all its parts.
</p>

<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Ps. 139:7 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>&mdash;<q>Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Or whither shall I flee from thy presence?</q></emph> <emph>Jer. 23:23,
24&mdash;<q>Am I a God at hand, saith Jehovah, and not a God afar off?... Do not I fill heaven and earth?</q></emph> <emph>Acts
17:27, 28&mdash;<q>he is not far from each one of us: for in him we live, and move, and have our being.</q></emph> Faber:
<q>For God is never so far off As even to be near. He is within. Our spirit is The
home he holds most dear. To think of him as by our side Is almost as untrue As to
remove his shrine beyond Those skies of starry blue. So all the while I thought myself
Homeless, forlorn and weary, Missing my joy, I walked the earth Myself God's sanctuary.</q>
Henri Amiel: <q>From every point on earth we are equally near to heaven
and the infinite.</q> Tennyson, The Higher Pantheism: <q>Speak to him then, for he
hears, and spirit with spirit can meet; Closer is he than breathing, and nearer than
hands and feet.</q> <q>As full, as perfect, in a hair as heart.</q>
</p>

<p>
The atheist wrote: <q>God is nowhere,</q> but his little daughter read it: <q>God is
now here,</q> and it converted him. The child however sometimes asks: <q>If God is
everywhere, how is there any room for us?</q> and the only answer is that God is not a
material but a spiritual being, whose presence does not exclude finite existence but
rather makes such existence possible. This universal presence of God had to be
learned gradually. It required great faith in Abraham to go out from Ur of the Chaldees,
and yet to hold that God would be with him in a distant land (<emph>Heb. 11:8</emph>). Jacob
learned that the heavenly ladder followed him wherever he went (<emph>Gen. 28:15</emph>). Jesus
taught that <emph><q>neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, shall ye worship the Father</q> (John 4:21)</emph>. Our
Lord's mysterious comings and goings after his resurrection were intended to teach his
disciples that he was with them <emph><q>always, even unto the end of the world</q> (Mat. 28:20)</emph>. The omnipresence
of Jesus demonstrates, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a fortiori</foreign>, the omnipresence of God.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In explanation of this attribute we may say:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) God's omnipresence is not potential but essential.&mdash;We reject the
Socinian representation that God's essence is in heaven, only his power on
earth. When God is said to <q>dwell in the heavens,</q> we are to understand
the language either as a symbolic expression of exaltation above earthly
things, or as a declaration that his most special and glorious self-manifestations
are to the spirits of heaven.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Ps. 123:1&mdash;<q>O thou that sittest in the heavens</q></emph>; <emph>113:5&mdash;<q>That hath his seat on high</q></emph>; <emph>Is. 57:15&mdash;<q>the high
and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity.</q></emph> Mere potential omnipresence is Deistic as well as Socinian.
Like birds in the air or fish in the sea, <q>at home, abroad, We are surrounded
still with God.</q> We do not need to go up to heaven to call him down, or into the abyss
to call him up (<emph>Rom. 10:6, 7</emph>). The best illustration is found in the presence of the soul
in every part of the body. Mind seems not confined to the brain. Natural realism in
philosophy, as distinguished from idealism, requires that the mind should be at the
point of contact with the outer world, instead of having reports and ideas brought to
it in the brain; see Porter, Human Intellect, 149. All believers in a soul regard the
soul as at least present in all parts of the brain, and this is a relative omnipresence no
less difficult in principle than its presence in all parts of the body. An animal's brain
may be frozen into a piece solid as ice, yet, after thawing, it will act as before:
although freezing of the whole body will cause death. If the immaterial principle
were confined to the brain we should expect freezing of the brain to cause death.
But if the soul may be omnipresent in the body or even in the brain, the divine Spirit
may be omnipresent in the universe. Bowne, Metaphysics, 136&mdash;<q>If finite things are
modes of the infinite, each thing must be a mode of the entire infinite; and the infinite
must be present in its unity and completeness in every finite thing, just as the entire
soul is present in all its acts.</q> This idealistic conception of the entire mind as present
in all its thoughts must be regarded as the best analogue to God's omnipresence in the
universe. We object to the view that this omnipresence is merely potential, as we
find it in Clarke, Christian Theology, 74&mdash;<q>We know, and only know, that God is able
to put forth all his power of action, without regard to place.... Omnipresence is an
element in the immanence of God.... A local God would be no real God. If he is not
everywhere, he is not true God anywhere. Omnipresence is implied in all providence,
in all prayer, in all communion with God and reliance on God.</q>
</p>

<p>
So long as it is conceded that consciousness is not confined to a single point in the
brain, the question whether other portions of the brain or of the body are also the seat
of consciousness may be regarded as a purely academic one, and the answer need not
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
affect our present argument. The principle of omnipresence is granted when once we
hold that the soul is conscious at more than one point of the physical organism. Yet
the question suggested above is an interesting one and with regard to it psychologists
are divided. Paulsen, Einleitung in die Philosophie (1892), 138-159, holds that consciousness
is correlated with the sum-total of bodily processes, and with him agree
Fechner and Wundt. <q>Pflüger and Lewes say that as the hemispheres of the brain
owe their intelligence to the consciousness which we know to be there, so the intelligence
of the spinal cord's acts must really be due to the invisible presence of a consciousness
lower in degree.</q> Professor Brewer's rattlesnake, after several hours of
decapitation, still struck at him with its bloody neck, when he attempted to seize it by
the tail. From the reaction of the frog's leg after decapitation may we not infer a
certain consciousness? <q>Robin, on tickling the breast of a criminal an hour after
decapitation, saw the arm and hand move toward the spot.</q> Hudson, Demonstration
of a Future Life, 239-249, quotes from Hammond, Treatise on Insanity, chapter 2, to
prove that the brain is not the sole organ of the mind. Instinct does not reside exclusively
in the brain; it is seated in the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>medulla oblongata</foreign>, or in the spinal cord, or in
both these organs. Objective mind, as Hudson thinks, is the function of the physical
brain, and it ceases when the brain loses its vitality. Instinctive acts are performed by
animals after excision of the brain, and by human beings born without brain. Johnson,
in Andover Rev., April, 1890:421&mdash;<q>The brain is not the only seat of consciousness.
The same evidence that points to the brain as the <emph>principal</emph> seat of consciousness
points to the nerve-centres situated in the spinal cord or elsewhere as the seat of a
more or less <emph>subordinate</emph> consciousness or intelligence.</q> Ireland, Blot on the Brain,
26&mdash;<q>I do not take it for proved that consciousness is entirely confined to the brain.</q>
</p>

<p>
In spite of these opinions, however, we must grant that the general consensus among
psychologists is upon the other side. Dewey, Psychology, 349&mdash;<q>The sensory and
motor nerves have points of meeting in the spinal cord. When a stimulus is transferred
from a sensory nerve to a motor without the conscious intervention of the
mind, we have reflex action.... If something approaches the eye, the stimulus is
transferred to the spinal cord, and instead of being continued to the brain and giving
rise to a sensation, it is discharged into a motor nerve and the eye is immediately
closed.... The reflex action in itself involves no consciousness.</q> William James,
Psychology, 1:16, 66, 134, 214&mdash;<q>The cortex of the brain is the sole organ of consciousness
in man.... If there be any consciousness pertaining to the lower centres, it is a
consciousness of which the self knows nothing.... In lower animals this may not be
so much the case.... The seat of the mind, so far as its dynamical relations are
concerned, is somewhere in the cortex of the brain.</q> See also C. A. Strong, Why the
Mind has a Body, 40-50.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) God's omnipresence is not the presence of a part but of the whole of
God in every place.&mdash;This follows from the conception of God as incorporeal
We reject the materialistic representation that God is composed of
material elements which can be divided or sundered. There is no multiplication
or diffusion of his substance to correspond with the parts of his
dominions. The one essence of God is present at the same moment in all.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>1 Kings 8:27&mdash;<q rend='pre'>the heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain</q></emph> (circumscribe) <emph><q rend='post'>thee.</q></emph> God must
be present in all his essence and all his attributes in every place. He is <q>totus in omni
parte.</q> Alger, Poetry of the Orient: <q>Though God extends beyond Creation's rim,
Each smallest atom holds the whole of him.</q> From this it follows that the whole
Logos can be united to and be present in the man Christ Jesus, while at the same time
he fills and governs the whole universe; and so the whole Christ can be united to, and
can be present in, the single believer, as fully as if that believer were the only one to
receive of his fulness.
</p>

<p>
A. J. Gordon: <q>In mathematics the whole is equal to the sum of its parts. But
we know of the Spirit that every part is equal to the whole. Every church, every
true body of Jesus Christ, has just as much of Christ as every other, and each has the
whole Christ.</q> <emph>Mat. 13:20&mdash;<q>where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them.</q></emph> <q>The parish priest of austerity Climbed up in a high church steeple, To be
nearer God so that he might Hand his word down to the people. And in sermon
script he daily wrote What he thought was sent from heaven, And he dropt it down on
the people's heads Two times one day in seven. In his age God said, <q>Come down and
die,</q> And he cried out from the steeple, <q>Where art thou, Lord?</q> And the Lord
replied, <q>Down here among my people.</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) God's omnipresence is not necessary but free.&mdash;We reject the pantheistic
notion that God is bound to the universe as the universe is bound
to God. God is immanent in the universe, not by compulsion, but by
the free act of his own will, and this immanence is qualified by his transcendence.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
God might at will cease to be omnipresent, for he could destroy the universe; but
while the universe exists, he is and must be in all its parts. God is the life and law of
the universe,&mdash;this is the truth in pantheism. But he is also personal and free,&mdash;this
pantheism denies. Christianity holds to a free, as well as to an essential, omnipresence&mdash;qualified
and supplemented, however, by God's transcendence. The boasted truth in
pantheism is an elementary principle of Christianity, and is only the stepping-stone to a
nobler truth&mdash;God's personal presence with his church. The Talmud contrasts the
worship of an idol and the worship of Jehovah: <q>The idol seems so near, but is so far,
Jehovah seems so far, but is so near!</q> God's omnipresence assures us that he is present
with us to hear, and present in every heart and in the ends of the earth to answer,
prayer. See Rogers, Superhuman Origin of the Bible, 10; Bowne, Metaphysics, 136;
Charnock, Attributes, 1:363-405.
</p>

<p>
The Puritan turned from the moss-rose bud, saying: <q>I have learned to call nothing
on earth lovely.</q> But this is to despise not only the workmanship but the presence
of the Almighty. The least thing in nature is worthy of study because it is the revelation
of a present God. The uniformity of nature and the reign of law are nothing but
the steady will of the omnipresent God. Gravitation is God's omnipresence in space,
as evolution is God's omnipresence in time. Dorner, System of Doctrine, 1:73-<q>God
being omnipresent, contact with him may be sought at any moment in prayer and
contemplation; indeed, it will always be true that we live and move and have our
being in him, as the perennial and omnipresent source of our existence.</q> <emph>Rom. 10:6-8&mdash;<q>Say
not in thy heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down:) or, Who shall descend into the
abyss? (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead.) But what saith it? The word is nigh thee, in thy mouth,
and in thy heart.</q></emph> Lotze, Metaphysics, § 256, quoted in Illingworth, Divine Immanence,
135, 136. Sunday-school scholar: <q>Is God in my pocket?</q> <q>Certainly.</q> <q>No, he
isn't, for I haven't any pocket.</q> God is omnipresent so long as there is a universe,
but he ceases to be omnipresent when the universe ceases to be.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Omniscience.</head>

<p>
By this we mean God's perfect and eternal knowledge of all things which
are objects of knowledge, whether they be actual or possible, past, present,
or future.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
God knows his inanimate creation: <emph>Ps. 147:4&mdash;<q>counteth the number of the stars; He calleth them all
by their names.</q></emph> He has knowledge of brute creatures: <emph>Mat. 10:29</emph>&mdash;sparrows&mdash;<emph><q>not one of them
shall fall on the ground without your Father.</q></emph> Of men and their works: <emph>Ps. 33:13-15&mdash;<q>beholdeth all the
sons of men ... considereth all their works.</q></emph> Of hearts of men and their thoughts: <emph>Acts 15:8&mdash;<q>God,
who knoweth the heart</q></emph>; <emph>Ps. 139:2&mdash;<q>understandest my thought afar off.</q></emph> Of our wants: <emph>Mat. 6:8&mdash;<q>knoweth
what things ye have need of.</q></emph> Of the least things: <emph>Mat. 10:30&mdash;<q>the very hairs of your head are
all numbered.</q></emph> Of the past: <emph>Mal. 3:16&mdash;<q>book of remembrance.</q></emph> Of the future: <emph>Is. 46:9, 10&mdash;<q>declaring
the end from the beginning.</q></emph> Of men's future free acts: <emph>Is. 44:28&mdash;<q>that saith of Cyrus, He is my
shepherd and shall perform all my pleasure.</q></emph> Of men's future evil acts: <emph>Acts 2:23&mdash;<q>him, being delivered
up by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God.</q></emph> Of the ideally possible: <emph>1 Sam. 23:12&mdash;<q>Will
the men of Keilah deliver up me and my men into the hands of Saul? And Jehovah said, They will deliver thee up</q></emph>
(<hi rend='italic'>sc.</hi> if thou remainest); <emph>Mat. 11:23&mdash;<q>if the mighty works had been done in Sodom which were done in thee,
it would have remained.</q></emph> From eternity: <emph>Acts 15:18&mdash;<q>the Lord, who maketh these things known from of
old.</q></emph> Incomprehensible: <emph>Ps. 139:6&mdash;<q>Such knowledge is too wonderful for me</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 11:33&mdash;<q>O the
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and the knowledge of God.</q></emph> Related to wisdom: <emph>Ps. 104:24&mdash;<q>In
wisdom hast thou made them all</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 3:10&mdash;<q>manifold wisdom of God.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
<emph>Job 7:20&mdash;<q>O thou watcher of men</q></emph>; <emph>Ps. 56:8&mdash;<q>Thou numberest my wanderings</q></emph> = my whole life has
been one continuous exile; <emph><q>Put thou my tears into thy bottle</q></emph> = the skin bottle of the east,&mdash;there
are tears enough to fill one; <emph><q>Are they not in thy book?</q></emph> = no tear has fallen to the
ground unnoted,&mdash;God has gathered them all. Paul Gerhardt: <q>Du zählst wie oft
ein Christe wein', Und was sein Kummer sei; Kein stilles Thränlein ist so klein,
Du hebst und legst es bei.</q> <emph>Heb. 4:13&mdash;<q>there is no creature that is not manifest in his sight: but all
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
things are naked and laid open before the eyes of him with whom we have to do</q></emph>&mdash;τετραχηλισμένα&mdash;with
head bent back and neck laid bare, as animals slaughtered in sacrifice, <emph>or</emph> seized by the
throat and thrown on the back, so that the priest might discover whether there was
any blemish. Japanese proverb: <q>God has forgotten to forget.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The omniscience of God may be argued from his omnipresence, as
well as from his truth or self-knowledge, in which the plan of creation has
its eternal ground, and from prophecy, which expresses God's omniscience.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It is to be remembered that omniscience, as the designation of a relative and transitive
attribute, does not include God's self-knowledge. The term is used in the technical
sense of God's knowledge of all things that pertain to the universe of his creation.
H. A. Gordon: <q>Light travels faster than sound. You can see the flash of fire from
the cannon's mouth, a mile away, considerably before the noise of the discharge reaches
the ear. God flashed the light of prediction upon the pages of his word, and we see it.
Wait a little and we see the event itself.</q>
</p>

<p>
Royce, The Conception of God, 9&mdash;<q>An omniscient being would be one who simply
found presented to him, not by virtue of fragmentary and gradually completed processes
of inquiry, but by virtue of an all-embracing, direct and transparent insight into
his own truth&mdash;who found thus presented to him, I say, the complete, the fulfilled
answer to every genuinely rational question.</q>
</p>

<p>
Browning, Ferishtah's Fancies, Plot-culture: <q>How will it fare shouldst thou
impress on me That certainly an Eye is over all And each, to make the minute's deed,
word, thought As worthy of reward and punishment? Shall I permit my sense an Eye-viewed
shame, Broad daylight perpetration,&mdash;so to speak,&mdash;I had not dared to breathe
within the Ear, With black night's help around me?</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Since it is free from all imperfection, God's knowledge is immediate,
as distinguished from the knowledge that comes through sense or imagination;
simultaneous, as not acquired by successive observations, or built
up by processes of reasoning; distinct, as free from all vagueness or confusion;
true, as perfectly corresponding to the reality of things; eternal,
as comprehended in one timeless act of the divine mind.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
An infinite mind must always act, and must always act in an absolutely perfect
manner. There is in God no sense, symbol, memory, abstraction, growth, reflection,
reasoning,&mdash;his knowledge is all direct and without intermediaries. God was properly
represented by the ancient Egyptians, not as having eye, but as being eye. His
thoughts toward us are <emph><q>more than can be numbered</q> (Ps. 40:5)</emph>, not because there is succession
in them, now a remembering and now a forgetting, but because there is never a
moment of our existence in which we are out of his mind; he is always thinking of
us. See Charnock, Attributes, 1:406-497. <emph>Gen. 16:13&mdash;<q>Thou art a God that seeth.</q></emph> Mivart, Lessons
from Nature, 374&mdash;<q>Every creature of every order of existence, while its existence
is sustained, is so complacently contemplated by God, that the intense and concentrated
attention of all men of science together upon it could but form an utterly
inadequate symbol of such divine contemplation.</q> So God's scrutiny of every deed of
darkness is more searching than the gaze of a whole Coliseum of spectators, and his eye
is more watchful over the good than would be the united care of all his hosts in heaven
and earth.
</p>

<p>
Armstrong, God and the Soul: <q>God's energy is concentrated attention, attention
concentrated everywhere. We can attend to two or three things at once; the pianist
plays and talks at the same time; the magician does one thing while he seems to do
another. God attends to all things, does all things, at once.</q> Marie Corelli, Master
Christian, 104&mdash;<q>The biograph is a hint that every scene of human life is reflected in a
ceaseless moving panorama <emph>some where</emph>, for the beholding of <emph>some one</emph>.</q> Wireless
telegraphy is a stupendous warning that from God no secrets are hid, that <emph><q>there is nothing
covered that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known</q> (Mat. 10:26)</emph>. The Röntgen rays,
which take photographs of our insides, right through our clothes, and even in the
darkness of midnight, show that to God <emph><q>the night shineth as the day</q> (Ps. 139:12)</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Professor Mitchel's equatorial telescope, slowly moving by clockwork, toward sunset,
suddenly touched the horizon and disclosed a boy in a tree stealing apples, but the
boy was all unconscious that he was under the gaze of the astronomer. Nothing was
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
so fearful to the prisoner in the French <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>cachot</foreign> as the eye of the guard that never
ceased to watch him in perfect silence through the loophole in the door. As in the
Roman empire the whole world was to a malefactor one great prison, and in his flight
to the most distant lands the emperor could track him, so under the government of
God no sinner can escape the eye of his Judge. But omnipresence is protective as well
as detective. The text <emph>Gen. 16:13&mdash;<q>Thou, God, seest me</q></emph>&mdash;has been used as a restraint from
evil more than as a stimulus to good. To the child of the devil it should certainly be
the former. But to the child of God it should as certainly be the latter. God should
not be regarded as an exacting overseer or a standing threat, but rather as one who
understands us, loves us, and helps us. <emph>Ps. 139:17, 18&mdash;<q>How precious also are thy thoughts unto me,
O God! How great is the sum of them! If I should count them, they are more in number than the sand: When I
awake, I am still with thee.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Since God knows things as they are, he knows the necessary
sequences of his creation as necessary, the free acts of his creatures as free,
the ideally possible as ideally possible.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
God knows what would have taken place under circumstances not now present;
knows what the universe would have been, had he chosen a different plan of creation;
knows what our lives would have been, had we made different decisions in the past
(<emph>Is. 48:18&mdash;<q>Oh that thou hadst hearkened ... then had thy peace been as a river</q></emph>). Clarke, Christian
Theology, 77&mdash;<q>God has a double knowledge of his universe. He knows it as it exists
eternally in his mind, as his own idea; and he knows it as actually existing in time and
space, a moving, changing, growing universe, with perpetual process of succession.
In his own idea, he knows it all at once; but he is also aware of its perpetual becoming,
and with reference to events as they occur he has foreknowledge, present knowledge,
and knowledge afterwards.... He conceives of all things simultaneously, but observes
all things in their succession.</q>
</p>

<p>
Royce, World and Individual, 2:374&mdash;holds that God does not temporally foreknow
anything except as he is expressed in finite beings, but yet that the Absolute possesses
a perfect knowledge at one glance of the whole of the temporal order, present, past
and future. This, he says, is not foreknowledge, but eternal knowledge. Priestley
denied that any contingent event could be an object of knowledge. But Reid says the
denial that any free action can be foreseen involves the denial of God's own free
agency, since God's future actions can be foreseen by men; also that while God foresees
his own free actions, this does not determine those actions necessarily. Tennyson,
In Memoriam, 26&mdash;<q>And if that eye which watches guilt And goodness, and hath power
to see Within the green the mouldered tree, And towers fallen as soon as built&mdash;Oh,
if indeed that eye foresee Or see (in Him is no before) In more of life true life no more
And Love the indifference to be, Then might I find, ere yet the morn Breaks hither
over Indian seas, That Shadow waiting with the keys, To shroud me from my proper
scorn.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The fact that there is nothing in the present condition of things
from which the future actions of free creatures necessarily follow by natural
law does not prevent God from foreseeing such actions, since his
knowledge is not mediate, but immediate. He not only foreknows the
motives which will occasion men's acts, but he directly foreknows the acts
themselves. The possibility of such direct knowledge without assignable
grounds of knowledge is apparent if we admit that time is a form of finite
thought to which the divine mind is not subject.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Aristotle maintained that there is no certain knowledge of contingent future events.
Socinus, in like manner, while he admitted that God knows all things that are knowable,
abridged the objects of the divine knowledge by withdrawing from the number
those objects whose future existence he considered as uncertain, such as the determinations
of free agents. These, he held, cannot be certainly foreknown, because there is
nothing in the present condition of things from which they will necessarily follow by
natural law. The man who makes a clock can tell when it will strike. But free-will,
not being subject to mechanical laws, cannot have its acts predicted or foreknown.
God knows things only in their causes&mdash;future events only in their antecedents. John
Milton seems also to deny God's foreknowledge of free acts: <q>So, without least impulse
or shadow of fate, Or aught by me immutably foreseen, They trespass.</q>
</p>

<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>

<p>
With this Socinian doctrine some Arminians agree, as McCabe, in his Foreknowledge
of God, and in his Divine Nescience of Future Contingencies a Necessity. McCabe,
however, sacrifices the principle of free will, in defence of which he makes this surrender
of God's foreknowledge, by saying that in cases of fulfilled prophecy, like Peter's
denial and Judas's betrayal, God brought special influences to bear to secure the result,&mdash;so
that Peter's and Judas's wills acted irresponsibly under the law of cause and effect.
He quotes Dr. Daniel Curry as declaring that <q>the denial of absolute divine foreknowledge
is the essential complement of the Methodist theology, without which its
philosophical incompleteness is defenceless against the logical consistency of Calvinism.</q>
See also article by McCabe in Methodist Review, Sept. 1892:760-773. Also Simon,
Reconciliation, 287&mdash;<q>God has constituted a creature, the actions of which he can only
know as such when they are performed. In presence of man, to a certain extent, even
the great God condescends to wait; nay more, has himself so ordained things that he
must wait, inquiring, <q>What will he do?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
So Dugald Stewart: <q>Shall we venture to affirm that it exceeds the power of God to
permit such a train of contingent events to take place as his own foreknowledge shall
not extend to?</q> Martensen holds this view, and Rothe, Theologische Ethik, 1:212-234,
who declares that the free choices of men are continually increasing the knowledge
of God. So also Martineau, Study of Religion, 2:279&mdash;<q>The belief in the divine foreknowledge
of our future has no basis in philosophy. We no longer deem it true that
even God knows the moment of my moral life that is coming next. Even he does not
know whether I shall yield to the secret temptation at midday. To him life is a drama
of which he knows not the conclusion.</q> Then, says Dr. A. J. Gordon, there is nothing
so dreary and dreadful as to be living under the direction of such a God. The universe
is rushing on like an express-train in the darkness without headlight or engineer; at
any moment we may be plunged into the abyss. Lotze does not deny God's foreknowledge
of free human actions, but he regards as insoluble by the intellect the problem
of the relation of time to God, and such foreknowledge as <q>one of those postulates as
to which we know not how they can be fulfilled.</q> Bowne, Philosophy of Theism, 159&mdash;<q>Foreknowledge
of a free act is a knowledge without assignable grounds of knowing.
On the assumption of a real time, it is hard to find a way out of this difficulty.... The
doctrine of the ideality of time helps us by suggesting the possibility of an all-embracing
present, or an eternal now, for God. In that case the problem vanishes with time, its
condition.</q>
</p>

<p>
Against the doctrine of the divine nescience we urge not only our fundamental conviction
of God's perfection, but the constant testimony of Scripture. In <emph>Is. 41:21, 22</emph>, God
makes his foreknowledge the test of his Godhead in the controversy with idols. If God
cannot foreknow free human acts, then <emph><q>the Lamb that hath been slain from the foundation of the
world</q> (Rev. 13:8)</emph> was only a sacrifice to be offered <emph>in case</emph> Adam should fall, God not
knowing whether he would or not, and <emph>in case</emph> Judas should betray Christ, God not
knowing whether he would or not. Indeed, since the course of nature is changed by
man's will when he burns towns and fells forests, God cannot on this theory predict
even the course of nature. All prophecy is therefore a protest against this view.
</p>

<p>
How God foreknows free human decisions we may not be able to say, but then the
method of God's knowledge in many other respects is unknown to us. The following
explanations have been proposed. God may foreknow free acts:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Mediately</hi>, by foreknowing the motives of these acts, and this either because these
motives induce the acts, (1) necessarily, or (2) certainly. This last <q>certainly</q> is to be
accepted, if either; since motives are never <emph>causes</emph>, but are only <emph>occasions</emph>, of action.
The cause is the will, or the man himself. But it may be said that foreknowing acts
through their motives is not foreknowing at all, but is reasoning or inference rather.
Moreover, although intelligent beings commonly act according to motives previously
dominant, they also at critical epochs, as at the fall of Satan and of Adam, choose
between motives, and in such cases knowledge of the motives which have hitherto
actuated them gives no clue to their next decisions. Another statement is therefore
proposed to meet these difficulties, namely, that God may foreknow free acts:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Immediately</hi>, by pure intuition, inexplicable to us. Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin,
2:203, 225&mdash;<q>If God can know a future event as certain only by a calculation of causes,
it must be allowed that he cannot with certainty foreknow any free act of man; for
his foreknowledge would then be proof that the act in question was the necessary consequence
of certain causes, and was not in itself free. If, on the contrary, the divine
knowledge be regarded as <emph>intuitive</emph>, we see that it stands in the same immediate relation
to the act itself as to its antecedents, and thus the difficulty is removed.</q> Even
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
upon this view there still remains the difficulty of perceiving how there can be in God's
mind a subjective certitude with regard to acts in respect to which there is no assignable
objective ground of certainty. Yet, in spite of this difficulty, we feel bound both
by Scripture and by our fundamental idea of God's perfection to maintain God's perfect
knowledge of the future free acts of his creatures. With President Pepper we say:
<q>Knowledge of contingency is not necessarily contingent knowledge.</q> With Whedon:
<q>It is not calculation, but pure knowledge.</q> See Dorner, System of Doct., 1:332-337;
2:58-62; Jahrbuch für deutsche Theologie, 1858:601-605; Charnock, Attributes, 1:429-446;
Solly, The Will, 240-254. For a valuable article on the whole subject, though advocating
the view that God foreknows acts by foreknowing motives, see Bib. Sac., Oct.
1883:655-694. See also Hill, Divinity, 517.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) Prescience is not itself causative. It is not to be confounded with
the predetermining will of God. Free actions do not take place because
they are foreseen, but they are foreseen because they are to take place.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Seeing a thing in the future does not cause it to be, more than seeing a thing in the
past causes it to be. As to future events, we may say with Whedon: <q>Knowledge
<emph>takes</emph> them, not <emph>makes</emph> them.</q> Foreknowledge may, and does, presuppose predetermination,
but it is not itself predetermination. Thomas Aquinas, in his Summa, 1:38:1:1,
says that <q>the knowledge of God is the cause of things</q>; but he is obliged to add:
<q>God is not the cause of all things that are known by God, since evil things that are
known by God are not from him.</q> John Milton, Paradise Lost, book 3&mdash;<q>Foreknowledge
had no influence on their fault, Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) Omniscience embraces the actual and the possible, but it does not
embrace the self-contradictory and the impossible, because these are not
objects of knowledge.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
God does not know what the result would be if two and two made five, nor does he
know <q>whether a chimæra ruminating in a vacuum devoureth second intentions</q>;
and that, simply for the reason that he cannot know self-contradiction and nonsense.
These things are not objects of knowledge. Clarke, Christian Theology, 80&mdash;<q>Can God
make an old man in a minute? Could he make it well with the wicked while they
remained wicked? Could he create a world in which 2 + 2 = 5?</q> Royce, Spirit of
Modern Philosophy, 366&mdash;<q>Does God know the whole number that is the square root
of 65? or what adjacent hills there are that have no valleys between them? Does God
know round squares, and sugar salt-lumps, and Snarks and Boojums and Abracadabras?</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) Omniscience, as qualified by holy will, is in Scripture denominated
<q>wisdom.</q> In virtue of his wisdom God chooses the highest ends and
uses the fittest means to accomplish them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Wisdom is not simply <q>estimating all things at their proper value</q> (Olmstead); it
has in it also the element of counsel and purpose. It has been defined as <q>the talent of
using one's talents.</q> It implies two things: first, choice of the highest end; secondly,
choice of the best means to secure this end. J. C. C. Clarke, Self and the Father, 39&mdash;<q>Wisdom
is not invented conceptions, or harmony of theories with theories; but is
humble obedience of mind to the reception of facts that are found in things.</q> Thus
man's wisdom, obedience, faith, are all names for different aspects of the same thing.
And wisdom in God is the moral choice which makes truth and holiness supreme. Bowne,
Principles of Ethics, 261&mdash;<q>Socialism pursues a laudable end by unwise or destructive
means. It is not enough to mean well. Our methods must take some account of the
nature of things, if they are to succeed. We cannot produce well-being by law. No
legislation can remove inequalities of nature and constitution. Society cannot produce
equality, any more than it can enable a rhinoceros to sing, or legislate a cat into a lion.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. Omnipotence.</head>

<p>
By this we mean the power of God to do all things which are objects of
power, whether with or without the use of means.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Gen. 17:1&mdash;<q>I am God Almighty.</q></emph> He performs natural wonders: <emph>Gen. 1:1-3&mdash;<q>Let there be Light</q></emph>;
<emph>Is. 44:24&mdash;<q>stretcheth forth the heavens alone</q></emph>; <emph>Heb. 1:3&mdash;<q>upholding all things by the word of his power.</q></emph>
Spiritual wonders: <emph>2 Cor. 4:6&mdash;<q>God, that said, Light shall shine out of darkness, who shined in our hearts</q></emph>;
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
<emph>Eph. 1:19&mdash;<q>exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who believe</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 3:20&mdash;<q>able to do exceeding abundantly.</q></emph>
Power to create new things: <emph>Mat. 3:9&mdash;<q>able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham</q></emph>.
<emph>Rom. 4:17&mdash;<q>giveth life to the dead, and calleth the things that are not, as though they were.</q></emph> After his own
pleasure: <emph>Ps. 115:3&mdash;<q>He hath done whatsoever he hath pleased</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 1:11&mdash;<q>worketh all things after the
counsel of his will.</q></emph> Nothing impossible: <emph>Gen 18:14&mdash;<q>Is anything too hard for Jehovah?</q></emph> <emph>Mat. 19:26&mdash;<q>with
God all things are possible.</q></emph> E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 73&mdash;<q>If all power
in the universe is dependent on his creative will for its existence, it is impossible to conceive
any limit to his power except that laid on it by his own will. But this is only
negative proof; absolute omnipotence is not logically demonstrable, though readily
enough recognized as a just conception of the infinite God, when propounded on the
authority of a positive revelation.</q>
</p>

<p>
The omnipotence of God is illustrated by the work of the Holy Spirit, which in Scripture
is compared to wind, water and fire. The ordinary manifestations of these elements
afford no criterion of the effects they are able to produce. The rushing mighty
wind at Pentecost was the analogue of the wind-Spirit who bore everything before
him on the first day of creation (<emph>Gen. 1:2</emph>; <emph>John 3:8</emph>; <emph>Acts 2:2</emph>). The pouring out of the
Spirit is likened to the flood of Noah when the windows of heaven were opened and
there was not room enough to receive that which fell (<emph>Mal. 3:10</emph>). And the baptism of
the Holy Spirit is like the fire that shall destroy all impurity at the end of the world
(<emph>Mat. 3:11</emph>; <emph>2 Pet. 3:7-13</emph>). See A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 307-310.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Omnipotence does not imply power to do that which is not an object
of power; as, for example, that which is self-contradictory or contradictory
to the nature of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Self-contradictory things: <q>facere factum infectum</q>&mdash;the making of a past event to
have not occurred (hence the uselessness of praying: <q>May it be that much good was
done</q>); drawing a shorter than a straight line between two given points; putting two
separate mountains together without a valley between them. Things contradictory to
the nature of God: for God to lie, to sin, to die. To do such things would not imply
power, but impotence. God has all the power that is consistent with infinite perfection&mdash;all
power to do what is worthy of himself. So no greater thing can be said
by man than this: <q>I dare do all that may become a man; Who dares do more is
none.</q> Even God cannot make wrong to be right, nor hatred of himself to be blessed.
Some have held that the prevention of sin in a moral system is not an object of power,
and therefore that God cannot prevent sin in a moral system. We hold the contrary;
see this Compendium: Objections to the Doctrine of Decrees.
</p>

<p>
Dryden, Imitation of Horace, 3:29:71&mdash;<q>Over the past not heaven itself has power;
What has been has, and I have had my hour</q>&mdash;words applied by Lord John Russell to
his own career. Emerson, The Past: <q>All is now secure and fast, Not the gods can
shake the Past.</q> Sunday-school scholar: <q>Say, teacher, can God make a rock so big
that he can't lift it?</q> Seminary Professor: <q>Can God tell a lie?</q> Seminary student:
<q>With God all things are possible.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Omnipotence does not imply the exercise of all his power on the
part of God. He has power over his power; in other words, his power is
under the control of wise and holy will. God can do all he will, but he
will not do all he can. Else his power is mere force acting necessarily,
and God is the slave of his own omnipotence.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Schleiermacher held that nature not only is grounded in the divine causality, but
fully expresses that causality; there is no causative power in God for anything that is
not real and actual. This doctrine does not essentially differ from Spinoza's <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>natura
naturans</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>natura naturata</foreign>. See Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 2:62-66. But omnipotence
is not instinctive; it is a power used according to God's pleasure. God is by
no means encompassed by the laws of nature, or shut up to a necessary evolution of
his own being, as pantheism supposes. As Rothe has shown, God has a will-power
over his nature-power, and is not compelled to do all that he can do. He is able from
the stones of the street to <q>raise up children unto Abraham,</q> but he has not done it.
In God are unopened treasures, an inexhaustible fountain of new beginnings, new
creations, new revelations. To suppose that in creation he has expended all the inner
possibilities of his being is to deny his omnipotence. So <emph>Job 26:14&mdash;<q>Lo, these are but the outskirts
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
of his ways: And how small a whisper do we hear of him! But the thunder of his power who can understand?</q></emph>
See Rogers, Superhuman Origin of the Bible, 10; Hodgson, Time and Space, 579, 580.
</p>

<p>
<emph>1 Pet. 5:6&mdash;<q>Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God</q></emph>&mdash;his mighty hand of providence,
salvation, blessing&mdash;<emph><q>that he may exalt you in due time; casting all your anxiety upon him, because
he careth for you.</q></emph> <q>The mighty powers held under mighty control</q>&mdash;this is the greatest
exhibition of power. Unrestraint is not the highest freedom. Young men must learn
that self-restraint is the true power. <emph>Prov. 16:32&mdash;<q>He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty;
And he that ruleth his spirit, than he that taketh a city.</q></emph> Shakespeare, Coriolanus, 2:3&mdash;<q>We have
power in ourselves to do it, but it is a power that we have no power to do.</q> When
dynamite goes off, it all goes off: there is no reserve. God uses as much of his power
as he pleases: the remainder of wrath in himself, as well as in others, he restrains.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Omnipotence in God does not exclude, but implies, the power of self-limitation.
Since all such self-limitation is free, proceeding from neither
external nor internal compulsion, it is the act and manifestation of God's
power. Human freedom is not rendered impossible by the divine omnipotence,
but exists by virtue of it. It is an act of omnipotence when God
humbles himself to the taking of human flesh in the person of Jesus Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Thomasius: <q>If God is to be over all and in all, he cannot himself be all.</q> <emph>Ps. 113: 5, 6&mdash;<q>Who
is like unto Jehovah our God.... That humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven and in
the earth?</q></emph> <emph>Phil. 2:7, 8&mdash;<q>emptied himself ... humbled himself.</q></emph> See Charnock, Attributes, 2:5-107.
President Woolsey showed true power when he controlled his indignation and let
an offending student go free. Of Christ on the cross, says Moberly, Atonement and
Personality, 116&mdash;<q>It was the power [to retain his life, to escape suffering], with the
will to hold it unused, which proved him to be what he was, the obedient and perfect
man.</q> We are likest the omnipotent One when we limit ourselves for love's sake.
The attribute of omnipotence is the ground of trust, as well as of fear, on the part of
God's creatures. Isaac Watts: <q>His every word of grace is strong As that which built
the skies; The voice that rolls the stars along Speaks all the promises.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Third Division.&mdash;Attributes having relation to Moral Beings.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Veracity and Faithfulness, or Transitive Truth.</head>

<p>
By veracity and faithfulness we mean the transitive truth of God, in its
twofold relation to his creatures in general and to his redeemed people in
particular.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Ps. 138:2&mdash;<q>I will ... give thanks unto thy name for thy lovingkindness and for thy truth: For thou hast
magnified thy word above all thy name</q></emph>; <emph>John 3:33&mdash;<q>hath set his seal to this, that God is true</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 3:4&mdash;<q>let
God be found true, but every man a liar</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 1:25&mdash;<q>the truth of God</q></emph>; <emph>John 14:17&mdash;<q>the Spirit of truth</q></emph>;
<emph>1 John 5:7&mdash;<q>the Spirit is the truth</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 1:9&mdash;<q>God is faithful</q></emph>; <emph>1 Thess. 5:24&mdash;<q>faithful is he that calleth
you</q></emph>; <emph>1 Pet. 4:19&mdash;<q>a faithful Creator</q></emph>; <emph>2 Cor. 1:20&mdash;<q>how many soever be the promises of God, in him is the
yea</q></emph>; <emph>Num. 23:19&mdash;<q>God is not a man that he should lie</q></emph>; <emph>Tit. 1:2&mdash;<q>God, who cannot lie, promised</q></emph>; <emph>Heb.
6:18&mdash;<q>in which it is impossible for God to lie.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) In virtue of his veracity, all his revelations to creatures consist with
his essential being and with each other.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In God's veracity we have the guarantee that our faculties in their normal exercise
do not deceive us; that the laws of thought are also laws of things; that the external
world, and second causes in it, have objective existence; that the same causes will
always produce the same effects; that the threats of the moral nature will be executed
upon the unrepentant transgressor; that man's moral nature is made in the image of
God's; and that we may draw just conclusions from what conscience is in us to what
holiness is in him. We may therefore expect that all past revelations, whether in nature
or in his word, will not only not be contradicted by our future knowledge, but will rather
prove to have in them more of truth than we ever dreamed. Man's word may pass
away, but God's word abides forever (<emph>Mat. 5:18&mdash;<q>one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass away from
the law</q></emph>; <emph>Is. 40:8&mdash;<q>the word of God shall stand forever</q></emph>).
</p>

<p>
<emph>Mat. 6:16&mdash;<q>be not as the hypocrites.</q></emph> In God the outer expression and the inward reality
always correspond. Assyrian wills were written on a small tablet encased in another
upon which the same thing was written over again. Breakage, or falsification, of the
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
outer envelope could be corrected by reference to the inner. So our outer life should
conform to the heart within, and the heart within to the outer life. On the duty of
speaking the truth, and the limitations of the duty, see Newman Smyth, Christian
Ethics, 386-403&mdash;<q>Give the truth always to those who in the bonds of humanity have
a right to the truth; conceal it, or falsify it, only when the human right to the truth
has been forfeited, or is held in abeyance, by sickness, weakness, or some criminal
intent.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) In virtue of his faithfulness, he fulfills all his promises to his people,
whether expressed in words or implied in the constitution he has given
them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In God's faithfulness we have the sure ground of confidence that he will perform
what his love has led him to promise to those who obey the gospel. Since his promises
are based, not upon what we are or have done, but upon what Christ is and has done, our
defects and errors do not invalidate them, so long as we are truly penitent and believing:
<emph>1 John 1:9&mdash;<q>faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins</q></emph> = faithful to his promise, and righteous
to Christ. God's faithfulness also ensures a supply for all the real wants of our
being, both here and hereafter, since these wants are implicit promises of him who
made us: <emph>Ps. 84:11&mdash;<q>No good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly</q></emph>; <emph>91:4&mdash;<q>His truth is a
shield and a buckler</q></emph>; <emph>Mat. 6:33&mdash;<q>all these things shall be added unto you</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 2:9&mdash;<q>Things which eye saw
not, and ear heard not, And which entered not into the heart of man, Whatsoever things God prepared for them that love
him.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
Regulus goes back to Carthage to die rather than break his promise to his enemies.
George William Curtis economizes for years, and gives up all hope of being himself
a rich man, in order that he may pay the debts of his deceased father. When General
Grant sold all the presents made to him by the crowned heads of Europe, and paid the
obligations in which his insolvent son had involved him, he said: <q>Better poverty and
honor, than wealth and disgrace.</q> Many a business man would rather die than fail to
fulfil his promise and let his note go to protest. <q>Maxwelton braes are bonnie, Where
early falls the dew, And 'twas there that Annie Laurie Gave me her promise true;
Which ne'er forget will I; And for bonnie Annie Laurie I'd lay me down and dee.</q>
Betray the man she loves? Not <q>Till a' the seas gang dry, my dear, And the rocks
melt wi'the sun.</q> God's truth will not be less than that of mortal man. God's veracity
is the natural correlate to our faith.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Mercy and Goodness, or Transitive Love.</head>

<p>
By mercy and goodness we mean the transitive love of God in its two-fold
relation to the disobedient and to the obedient portions of his
creatures.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Titus 3:4&mdash;<q>his love toward man</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 2:4&mdash;<q>goodness of God</q></emph>; <emph>Mat. 5:44, 45&mdash;<q>love your enemies ...
that ye may be sons of your Father</q></emph>; <emph>John 3:16&mdash;<q>God so loved the world</q></emph>; <emph>2 Pet. 1:3&mdash;<q>granted unto us all
things that pertain unto life and godliness</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 8:32&mdash;<q>freely give us all things</q></emph>; <emph>John 4:10&mdash;<q>Herein is
love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.</q></emph>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Mercy is that eternal principle of God's nature which leads him to
seek the temporal good and eternal salvation of those who have opposed
themselves to his will, even at the cost of infinite self-sacrifice.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Martensen: <q>Viewed in relation to sin, eternal love is compassionate grace.</q> God's
continued importation of natural life is a foreshadowing, in a lower sphere, of what he
desires to do for his creatures in the higher sphere&mdash;the communication of spiritual
and eternal life through Jesus Christ. When he bids us love our enemies, he only bids
us follow his own example. Shakespeare, Titus Andronicus, 2:2&mdash;<q>Wilt thou draw
near the nature of the gods? Draw near them, then, in being merciful.</q> Twelfth
Night, 3:4&mdash;<q>In nature there's no blemish but the mind; None can be called deformed
but the unkind. Virtue is beauty.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Goodness is the eternal principle of God's nature which leads him to
communicate of his own life and blessedness to those who are like him in
moral character. Goodness, therefore, is nearly identical with the love of
complacency; mercy, with the love of benevolence.
</p>

<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Notice, however, that transitive love is but an outward manifestation of immanent
love. The eternal and perfect object of God's love is in his own nature. Men become
subordinate objects of that love only as they become connected and identified with its
principal object, the image of God's perfections in Christ. Only in the Son do men
become sons of God. To this is requisite an acceptance of Christ on the part of man.
Thus it can be said that God imparts himself to men just so far as men are willing to
receive him. And as God gives himself to men, in all his moral attributes, to answer
for them and to renew them in character, there is truth in the statement of Nordell
(Examiner, Jan. 17, 1884) that <q>the maintenance of holiness is the function of divine
justice; the diffusion of holiness is the function of divine love.</q> We may grant this
as substantially true, while yet we deny that love is a mere form or manifestation of
holiness. Self-impartation is different from self-affirmation. The attribute which moves
God to pour out is not identical with the attribute which moves him to maintain.
The two ideas of holiness and of love are as distinct as the idea of integrity on the one
hand and of generosity on the other. Park: <q>God loves Satan, in a certain sense, and
we ought to.</q> Shedd: <q>This same love of compassion God feels toward the non-elect;
but the expression of that compassion is forbidden for reasons which are sufficient for
God, but are entirely unknown to the creature.</q> The goodness of God is the basis of
<emph>reward</emph>, under God's government. Faithfulness leads God to keep his promises; goodness
leads him to make them.
</p>

<p>
Edwards, Nature of Virtue, in Works, 2:263&mdash;Love of benevolence does not presuppose
beauty in its object. Love of complacence does presuppose beauty. Virtue is
not love to an object for its beauty. The beauty of intelligent beings does not consist
in love for beauty, or virtue in love for virtue. Virtue is love for being in general,
exercised in a general good will. This is the doctrine of Edwards. We prefer to say
that virtue is love, not for being in general, but for good being, and so for God, the
holy One. The love of compassion is perfectly compatible with hatred of evil and
with indignation against one who commits it. Love does not necessarily imply approval,
but it does imply desire that all creatures should fulfil the purpose of their existence
by being morally conformed to the holy One; see Godet, in The Atonement, 339.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Rom. 5:8&mdash;<q>God commendeth his own love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.</q></emph>
We ought to love our enemies, and Satan is our worst enemy. We ought to will the
good of Satan, or cherish toward him the love of benevolence, though not the love of
complacence. This does not involve a condoning of his sin, or an ignoring of his moral
depravity, as seems implied in the verses of Wm. C. Gannett: <q>The poem hangs on the
berry-bush When comes the poet's eye; The street begins to masquerade When
Shakespeare passes by. The Christ sees white in Judas' heart And loves his traitor
well; The God, to angel his new heaven, Explores his deepest hell.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. Justice and Righteousness, or Transitive Holiness.</head>

<p>
By justice and righteousness we mean the transitive holiness of God, in
virtue of which his treatment of his creatures conforms to the purity of his
nature,&mdash;righteousness demanding from all moral beings conformity to the
moral perfection of God, and justice visiting non-conformity to that perfection
with penal loss or suffering.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Gen. 18:25&mdash;<q>shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?</q></emph> <emph>Deut. 32:4&mdash;<q>All his ways are justice; A God of
faithfulness and without iniquity, Just and right is he</q></emph>; <emph>Ps. 5:5&mdash;<q>Thou hatest all workers of iniquity</q></emph>; <emph>7:9-12&mdash;<q>the
righteous God trieth the hearts ... saveth the upright ... is a righteous judge, Yea, a God that hath
indignation every day</q></emph>; <emph>18:24-26&mdash;<q>Jehovah recompensed me according to my righteousness.... With the
merciful, thou wilt show thyself merciful ... with the perverse thou wilt show thyself froward</q></emph>; <emph>Mat. 5:48&mdash;<q>Ye
therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 2:6&mdash;<q>will render to every man according to his
works</q></emph>; <emph>1 Pet. 1:16&mdash;<q>Ye shall be holy; for I am holy.</q></emph> These passages show that God loves the
same persons whom he hates. It is not true that he hates the sin, but loves the sinner;
he both hates and loves the sinner himself, hates him as he is a living and wilful antagonist
of truth and holiness, loves him as he is a creature capable of good and ruined by
his transgression.
</p>

<p>
There is no abstract sin that can be hated apart from the persons in whom that sin
is represented and embodied. Thomas Fuller found it difficult to starve the profaneness
but to feed the person of the impudent beggar who applied to him for food. Mr.
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
Finney declared that he would kill the slave-catcher, but would love him with all his
heart. In our civil war Dr. Kirk said: <q>God knows that we love the rebels, but God
also knows that we will kill them if they do not lay down their arms.</q> The complex
nature of God not only permits but necessitates this same double treatment of the
sinner, and the earthly father experiences the same conflict of emotions when his
heart yearns over the corrupt son whom he is compelled to banish from the household.
Moberly, Atonement and Personality, 7&mdash;<q>It is the sinner who is punished, not the sin.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Since justice and righteousness are simply transitive holiness&mdash;righteousness
designating this holiness chiefly in its mandatory, justice
chiefly in its punitive, aspect,&mdash;they are not mere manifestations of benevolence,
or of God's disposition to secure the highest happiness of his
creatures, nor are they grounded in the nature of things as something
apart from or above God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Cremer, N. T. Lexicon: δίκαιος = <q>the perfect coincidence existing between God's
nature, which is the standard for all, and his acts.</q> Justice and righteousness are
simply holiness exercised toward creatures. The same holiness which exists in God in
eternity past manifests itself as justice and righteousness, so soon as intelligent creatures
come into being. Much that was said under Holiness as an immanent attribute
of God is equally applicable here. The modern tendency to confound holiness with
love shows itself in the merging of justice and righteousness in mere benevolence.
Instances of this tendency are the following: Ritschl, Unterricht, § 16&mdash;<q>The righteousness
of God denotes the manner in which God carries out his loving will in the redemption
alike of humanity as a whole and of individual men; hence his righteousness is
indistinguishable from his grace</q>; see also Ritschl, Rechtf. und Versöhnung, 2:113;
3:296. Prof. George M. Forbes: <q>Only right makes love moral; only love makes right
moral.</q> Jones, Robert Browning, 70&mdash;<q>Is it not beneficence that places death at the
heart of sin? Carlyle forgot this. God is not simply a great taskmaster. The power
that imposes law is not an alien power.</q> D'Arcy, Idealism and Theology, 237-240&mdash;<q>How
can self-realization be the realization of others? Why must the true good be
always the common good? Why is the end of each the end of all?... We need a
concrete universal which will unify all persons.</q>
</p>

<p>
So also, Harris, Kingdom of Christ on Earth, 39-42; God the Creator, 287, 290, 302&mdash;<q>Love,
as required and regulated by reason, may be called righteousness. Love is universal
good will or benevolence, regulated in its exercise by righteousness. Love is
the choice of God and man as the objects of trust and service. This choice involves
the determination of the will to seek universal well-being, and in this aspect it is
benevolence. It also involves the consent of the will to the reason, and the determination
to regulate all action in seeking well-being by its truths, laws, and ideals; and in
this aspect it is righteousness.... Justice is the consent of the will to the law of love,
in its authority, its requirements, and its sanctions. God's wrath is the necessary
reaction of this law of love in the constitution and order of the universe against the
wilful violator of it, and Christ's sufferings atone for sin by asserting and maintaining
the authority, universality, and inviolability of God's law of love in his redemption of
men and his forgiveness of their sins.... Righteousness cannot be the whole of
love, for this would shut us up to the merely formal principle of the law without telling
us what the law requires. Benevolence cannot be the whole of love, for this
would shut us up to hedonism, in the form of utilitarianism, excluding righteousness
from the character of God and man.</q>
</p>

<p>
Newman Smyth also, in his Christian Ethics, 227-231, tells us that <q>love, as self-affirming,
is righteousness; as self-imparting, is benevolence; as self-finding in others, is
sympathy. Righteousness, as subjective regard for our own moral being, is holiness;
as objective regard for the persons of others, is justice. Holiness is involved in love
as its essential respect to itself; the heavenly Father is the holy Father (<emph>John 17:11</emph>).
Love contains in its unity a trinity of virtue. Love affirms its own worthiness, imparts
to others its good, and finds its life again in the well-being of others. The ethical limit
of self-impartation is found in self-affirmation. Love in self-bestowal cannot become
suicidal. The benevolence of love has its moral bounds in the holiness of love. True
love in God maintains its transcendence, and excludes pantheism.</q>
</p>

<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>

<p>
The above doctrine, quoted for substance from Newman Smyth, seems to us unwarrantably
to include in love what properly belongs to holiness. It virtually denies that
holiness has any independent existence as an attribute of God. To make holiness a
manifestation of love seems to us as irrational as to say that self-affirmation is a form
of self-impartation. The concession that holiness regulates and limits love shows that
holiness cannot itself be love, but must be an independent and superior attribute.
Right furnishes the rule and law for love, but it is not true that love furnishes the rule
and law for right. There is no such double sovereignty as this theory would imply.
The one attribute that is independent and supreme is holiness, and love is simply the
impulse to communicate this holiness.
</p>

<p>
William Ashmore: <q>Dr. Clarke lays great emphasis on the character of <q>a good God.</q>...
But he is more than a merely <emph>good</emph> God; he is a just God, and a righteous God, and
a holy God&mdash;a God who is <q>angry with the wicked,</q> even while ready to forgive them,
if they are willing to repent in his way, and not in their own. He is the God who
brought in a flood upon the world of the ungodly; who rained down fire and brimstone
from heaven; and who is to come in <q>flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God</q> and obey not the gospel of his son.... Paul reasoned about both
the <q>goodness</q> and the <q>severity</q> of God.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Transitive holiness, as righteousness, imposes law in conscience and
Scripture, and may be called legislative holiness. As justice, it executes
the penalties of law, and may be called distributive or judicial holiness.
In righteousness God reveals chiefly his love of holiness; in justice, chiefly
his hatred of sin.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The self-affirming purity of God demands a like purity in those who have been made
in his image. As God wills and maintains his own moral excellence, so all creatures
must will and maintain the moral excellence of God. There can be only one centre in
the solar system,&mdash;the sun is its own centre and the centre for all the planets also. So
God's purity is the object of his own will,&mdash;it must be the object of all the wills of all
his creatures also. Bixby, Crisis in Morals, 282&mdash;<q>It is not rational or safe for the
hand to separate itself from the heart. This is a <emph>universe</emph>, and God is the heart of the
great system. Altruism is not the result of society, but society is the result of altruism.
It begins in creatures far below man. The animals which know how to combine have
the greatest chance of survival. The unsociable animal dies out. The most perfect
organism is the most sociable. Right is the debt which the part owes to the whole.</q>
This seems to us but a partial expression of the truth. Right is more than a debt to
others,&mdash;it is a debt to one's self, and the self-affirming, self-preserving, self-respecting
element constitutes the limit and standard of all outgoing activity. The sentiment
of loyalty is largely a reverence for this principle of order and stability in government.
<emph>Ps. 145:5&mdash;<q>Of the glorious majesty of thine honor, And of thy wondrous works, will I meditate</q></emph>; <emph>97:2&mdash;<q>Clouds
and darkness are round about him: Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
John Milton, Eikonoklastes: <q>Truth and justice are all one; for truth is but justice
in our knowledge, and justice is but truth in our practice.... For truth is
properly no more than contemplation, and her utmost efficiency is but teaching; but
justice in her very essence is all strength and activity, and hath a sword put into her
hand to use against all violence and oppression on the earth. She it is who accepts no
person, and exempts none from the severity of her stroke.</q> A. J. Balfour, Foundations
of Belief, 326&mdash;<q>Even the poet has not dared to represent Jupiter torturing
Prometheus without the dim figure of Avenging Fate waiting silently in the background....
Evolution working out a nobler and nobler justice is proof that God is
just. Here is <q>preferential action</q>.</q> S. S. Times, June 9, 1900&mdash;<q>The natural man is
born with a wrong personal astronomy. Man should give up the conceit of being the
centre of all things. He should accept the Copernican theory, and content himself
with a place on the edge of things&mdash;the place he has always really had. We all laugh
at John Jasper and his thesis that <q>the sun do move.</q> The Copernican theory is leaking
down into human relations, as appears from the current phrase: <q>There are
others</q>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Neither justice nor righteousness, therefore, is a matter of arbitrary
will. They are revelations of the inmost nature of God, the one in the
form of moral requirement, the other in the form of judicial sanction. As
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
God cannot but demand of his creatures that they be like him in moral
character, so he cannot but enforce the law which he imposes upon them.
Justice just as much binds God to punish as it binds the sinner to be
punished.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
All arbitrariness is excluded here. God is what he is&mdash;infinite purity. He cannot
change. If creatures are to attain the end of their being, they must be like God in
moral purity. Justice is nothing but the recognition and enforcement of this natural
necessity. Law is only the transcript of God's nature. Justice does not make law,&mdash;it
only reveals law. Penalty is only the reaction of God's holiness against that which is
its opposite. Since righteousness and justice are only legislative and retributive holiness,
God can cease to demand purity and to punish sin only when he ceases to be holy,
that is, only when he ceases to be God. <q>Judex damnatur cum nocens absolvitur.</q>
</p>

<p>
Simon, Reconciliation, 141&mdash;<q>To claim the performance of duty is as truly obligatory
as it is obligatory to perform the duty which is prescribed.</q> E. H. Johnson, Systematic
Theology, 84&mdash;<q>Benevolence intends what is well for the creature; justice insists
on what is fit. But the well-for-us and the fit-for-us precisely coincide. The only thing
that is well for us is our normal employment and development; but to provide for
this is precisely what is fitting and therefore due to us. In the divine nature the distinction
between justice and benevolence is one of form.</q> We criticize this utterance
as not sufficiently taking into account the nature of the right. The right is not
merely the fit. Fitness is only general adaptation which may have in it no ethical element,
whereas right is solely and exclusively ethical. The right therefore regulates
the fit and constitutes its standard. The well-for-us is to be determined by the right-for-us,
but not <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>. George W. Northrup: <q>God is not bound to bestow the same
endowments upon creatures, nor to keep all in a state of holiness forever, nor to
redeem the fallen, nor to secure the greatest happiness of the universe. But he is
bound to purpose and to do what his absolute holiness requires. He has no attribute,
no will, no sovereignty, above this law of his being. He cannot lie, he cannot deny
himself, he cannot look upon sin with complacency, he cannot acquit the guilty without
an atonement.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Neither justice nor righteousness bestows rewards. This follows
from the fact that obedience is due to God, instead of being optional or a
gratuity. No creature can claim anything for his obedience. If God
rewards, he rewards in virtue of his goodness and faithfulness, not in virtue
of his justice or his righteousness. What the creature cannot claim, however,
Christ <emph>can</emph> claim, and the rewards which are goodness to the creature
are righteousness to Christ. God rewards Christ's work <emph>for</emph> us and <emph>in</emph> us.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Bruch, Eigenschaftslehre, 280-282, and John Austin, Province of Jurisprudence, 1:88-93,
220-223, both deny, and rightly deny, that justice bestows rewards. Justice simply
punishes infractions of law. In <emph>Mat. 25:34&mdash;<q>inherit the kingdom</q></emph>&mdash;inheritance implies no
merit; <emph>46</emph>&mdash;the wicked are adjudged to eternal punishment; the righteous, not to eternal
reward, but to eternal life. <emph>Luke 17:7-10&mdash;<q>when ye shall have done all the things that are commanded
you, say, We are unprofitable servants; we have done that which it was our duty to do.</q></emph> <emph>Rom. 6:23</emph>&mdash;punishment
is the <q><emph>wages of sin</emph></q>: but salvation is <q><emph>the gift of God</emph></q>; <emph>2:6</emph>&mdash;God rewards, not
<emph>on account of</emph> man's work but <q><emph>according to his works</emph>.</q> Reward is thus seen to be in Scripture
a matter of grace to the creature; only to the Christ who works for us in atonement,
and in us in regeneration and sanctification, is reward a matter of debt (see also
<emph>John 6:27</emph> and <emph>2 John 8</emph>). Martineau, Types, 2:86, 244, 249&mdash;<q>Merit is toward man; virtue
toward God.</q>
</p>

<p>
All mere service is unprofitable, because it furnishes only an equivalent to duty, and
there is no margin. Works of supererogation are impossible, because our all is due to
God. He would have us rise into the region of friendship, realize that he has been
treating us not as Master but as Father, enter into a relation of uncalculating love.
With this proviso that rewards are matters of grace, not of debt, we may assent to the
maxim of Solon: <q>A republic walks upon two feet&mdash;just punishment for the unworthy
and due reward for the worthy.</q> George Harris, Moral Evolution, 139&mdash;<q>Love
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
seeks righteousness, and is satisfied with nothing other than that.</q> But when Harris
adopts the words of the poet: <q>The very wrath from pity grew, From love of men the
hate of wrong,</q> he seems to us virtually to deny that God hates evil for any other
reason than because of its utilitarian disadvantages, and to imply that good has no
independent existence in his nature. Bowne, Ethics, 171&mdash;<q>Merit is desert of reward,
or better, desert of moral approval.</q> Tennyson: <q>For merit lives from man to man,
And not from man, O Lord, to thee.</q> Baxter: <q><hi rend='italic'>Desert</hi> is written over the gate of hell;
but over the gate of heaven only, <hi rend='italic'>The Gift of God</hi>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) Justice in God, as the revelation of his holiness, is devoid of all passion
or caprice. There is in God no selfish anger. The penalties he
inflicts upon transgression are not vindictive but vindicative. They express
the revulsion of God's nature from moral evil, the judicial indignation of
purity against impurity, the self-assertion of infinite holiness against its
antagonist and would-be destroyer. But because its decisions are calm,
they are irreversible.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Anger, within certain limits, is a duty of man. <emph>Ps. 97:10&mdash;<q>ye that love Jehovah, hate evil</q></emph>;
<emph>Eph. 4:28&mdash;<q>Be ye angry, and sin not.</q></emph> The calm indignation of the judge, who pronounces
sentence with tears, is the true image of the holy anger of God against sin. Weber,
Zorn Gottes, 28, makes wrath only the jealousy of love. It is more truly the jealousy
of holiness. Prof. W. A. Stevens, Com. on <emph>1 Thess. 2:10</emph>&mdash;<q><emph>Holily</emph> and <emph>righteously</emph> are terms
that describe the same conduct in two aspects; the former, as conformed to God's character
in itself; the latter, as conformed to his law; both are positive.</q> Lillie, on <emph>2
Thess. 1:6</emph>&mdash;<q>Judgment is <q><emph>a righteous thing with God</emph>.</q> Divine justice requires it for its own
satisfaction.</q> See Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:175-178, 365-385; Trench, Syn. N. T., 1:180, 181.
</p>

<p>
Of Gaston de Foix, the old chronicler admirably wrote: <q>He loved what ought to
be loved, and hated what ought to be hated, and never had miscreant with him.</q>
Compare <emph>Ps. 101:5, 6&mdash;<q>Him that hath a high look and a proud heart will I not suffer. Mine eyes shall be upon
the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me.</q></emph> Even Horace Bushnell spoke of the <q>wrath-principle</q>
in God. <emph>1 K. 11:9&mdash;<q>And Jehovah was angry with Solomon</q></emph> because of his polygamy.
Jesus' anger was no less noble than his love. The love of the right involved hatred of
the wrong. Those may hate who hate evil for its hatefulness and for the sake of God.
Hate sin in yourself first, and then you may hate it in itself and in the world. Be
angry only in Christ and with the wrath of God. W. C. Wilkinson, Epic of Paul, 264&mdash;<q>But
we must purge ourselves of self-regard, Or we are sinful in abhorring sin.</q>
Instance Judge Harris's pity, as he sentenced the murderer; see A. H. Strong, Philosophy
and Religion, 192, 193.
</p>

<p>
Horace's <q>Ira furor brevis est</q>&mdash;<q>Anger is a temporary madness</q>&mdash;is true only of
selfish and sinful anger. Hence the man who is angry is popularly called <q>mad.</q>
But anger, though apt to become sinful, is not necessarily so. Just anger is neither
madness, nor is it brief. Instance the judicial anger of the church of Corinth in inflicting
excommunication: <emph>2 Cor. 7:11&mdash;<q>what indignation, yea what fear, yea what longing, yea what zeal,
yea what avenging!</q></emph> The only revenge permissible to the Christian church is that in which
it pursues and exterminates sin. To be incapable of moral indignation against wrong
is to lack real love for the right. Dr. Arnold of Rugby was never sure of a boy who
only loved good; till the boy also began to hate evil, Dr. Arnold did not feel that he
was safe. Herbert Spencer said that good nature with Americans became a crime.
Lecky, Democracy and Liberty: <q>There is one thing worse than corruption, and that
is acquiescence in corruption.</q>
</p>

<p>
Colestock, Changing Viewpoint, 139&mdash;<q>Xenophon intends to say a very commendable
thing of Cyrus the Younger, when he writes of him that no one had done more
good to his friends or more harm to his enemies.</q> Luther said to a monkish antagonist:
<q>I will break in pieces your heart of brass and pulverize your iron brains.</q> Shedd,
Dogmatic Theology, 1:175-178&mdash;<q>Human character is worthless in proportion as
abhorrence of sin is lacking in it. It is related of Charles II that <q>he felt no gratitude
for benefits, and no resentment for wrongs; he did not love anyone, and he did not hate
anyone.</q> He was indifferent toward right and wrong, and the only feeling he had was
contempt.</q> But see the death-bed scene of the <q>merry monarch,</q> as portrayed in Bp.
Burnet, Evelyn's Memoirs, or the Life of Bp. Ken. Truly <emph><q>The end of mirth is heaviness</q> (Prov. 14:13)</emph>.
</p>

<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>

<p>
Stout, Manual of Psychology, 22&mdash;<q>Charles Lamb tells us that his friend George
Dyer could never be brought to say anything in condemnation of the most atrocious
crimes, except that the criminal must have been very eccentric.</q> Professor Seeley:
<q>No heart is pure that is not passionate.</q> D. W. Simon, Redemption of Man, 249, 250,
says that God's resentment <q>is a resentment of an essentially altruistic character.</q>
If this means that it is perfectly consistent with love for the sinner, we can accept
the statement; if it means that love is the only source of the resentment, we regard
the statement as a misinterpretation of God's justice, which is but the manifestation of
his holiness and is not a mere expression of his love. See a similar statement of Lidgett,
Spiritual Principle of the Atonement, 251&mdash;<q>Because God is love, his love coëxists
with his wrath against sinners, is the very life of that wrath, and is so persistent that
it uses wrath as its instrument, while at the same time it seeks and supplies a propitiation.</q>
This statement ignores the fact that punishment is never in Scripture regarded
as an expression of God's love, but always of God's holiness. When we say that we love
God, let us make sure that it is the true God, the God of holiness, that we love, for only
this love will make us like him.
</p>

<p>
The moral indignation of a whole universe of holy beings against moral evil, added to
the agonizing self-condemnations of awakened conscience in all the unholy, is only a
faint and small reflection of the awful revulsion of God's infinite justice from the
impurity and selfishness of his creatures, and of the intense, organic, necessary, and
eternal reaction of his moral being in self-vindication and the punishment of sin; see
<emph>Jer. 44:4&mdash;<q>Oh, do not this abominable thing that I hate!</q></emph> <emph>Num. 32:23&mdash;<q>be sure your sin will find you out</q></emph>;
<emph>Heb. 10:30, 31&mdash;<q>For we know him that said, Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompense. And again, The Lord
shall judge his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.</q></emph> On justice as an attribute
of a moral governor, see N. W. Taylor, Moral Government, 2:253-293; Owen, Dissertation
on Divine Justice, in Works, 10:483-624.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VII. Rank and Relations of the several Attributes.</head>

<p>
The attributes have relations to each other. Like intellect, affection and
will in man, no one of them is to be conceived of as exercised separately
from the rest. Each of the attributes is qualified by all the others. God's
love is immutable, wise, holy. Infinity belongs to God's knowledge, power,
justice. Yet this is not to say that one attribute is of as high rank as
another. The moral attributes of truth, love, holiness, are worthy of
higher reverence from men, and they are more jealously guarded by God,
than the natural attributes of omnipresence, omniscience, and omnipotence.
And yet even among the moral attributes one stands as supreme.
Of this and of its supremacy we now proceed to speak.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Water is not water unless composed of oxygen and hydrogen. Oxygen cannot be
resolved into hydrogen, nor hydrogen into oxygen. Oxygen has its own character,
though only in combination with hydrogen does it appear in water. Will in man
never acts without intellect and sensibility, yet will, more than intellect or sensibility,
is the manifestation of the man. So when God acts, he manifests not one attribute
alone, but his total moral excellence. Yet holiness, as an attribute of God, has rights
peculiar to itself; it determines the attitude of the affections; it more than any other
faculty constitutes God's moral being.
</p>

<p>
Clarke, Christian Theology, 83,92&mdash;<q>God would not be holy if he were not love, and
could not be love if he were not holy. Love is an element in holiness. If this were
lacking, there would be no perfect character as principle of his own action or as standard
for us. On the other hand only the perfect being can be love. God must be free from
all taint of selfishness in order to be love. Holiness requires God to act as love, for
holiness is God's self-consistency. Love is the desire to impart holiness. Holiness
makes God's character the standard for his creatures; but love, desiring to impart the
best good, does the same. All work of love is work of holiness, and all work of holiness
is work of love. Conflict of attributes is impossible, because holiness always
includes love, and love always expresses holiness. They never need reconciliation with
each other.</q>
</p>

<p>
The general correctness of the foregoing statement is impaired by the vagueness of
its conception of holiness. The Scriptures do not regard holiness as including love, or
make all the acts of holiness to be acts of love. Self-affirmation does not include self-impartation,
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
and sin necessitates an exercise of holiness which is not also an exercise
of love. But for the Cross, and God's suffering for sin of which the Cross is the expression,
there would be conflict between holiness and love. The wisdom of God is most
shown, not in reconciling man and God, but in reconciling the holy God with the
loving God.
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Holiness the fundamental attribute in God.</head>

<p>
That holiness is the fundamental attribute in God, is evident:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) From Scripture,&mdash;in which God's holiness is not only most constantly
and powerfully impressed upon the attention of man, but is declared
to be the chief subject of rejoicing and adoration in heaven.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It is God's attribute of holiness that first and most prominently presents itself to the
mind of the sinner, and conscience only follows the method of Scripture: <emph>1 Pet. 1:16&mdash;<q>Ye
shall be holy; for I am holy</q></emph>; <emph>Heb. 12:14&mdash;<q>the sanctification without which no man shall see the lord</q>;</emph> <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi>
<emph>Luke 5:8&mdash;<q>Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord.</q></emph> Yet this constant insistence upon holiness
cannot be due simply to man's present state of sin, for in heaven, where there is no
sin, there is the same reiteration: <emph>Is. 6:3&mdash;<q>Holy, holy, holy, is Jehovah of hosts</q></emph>; <emph>Rev. 4:8&mdash;<q>Holy,
holy, holy is the Lord God, the Almighty.</q></emph> Of no other attribute is it said that God's throne
rests upon it: <emph>Ps. 97:2&mdash;<q>Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne</q></emph>; <emph>99:4, 5, 9&mdash;<q>The king's
strength also loveth justice.... Exalt ye Jehovah our God.... holy is he.</q></emph> We would substitute the
word holiness for the word love in the statement of Newman Smyth, Christian Ethics,
45&mdash;<q>We assume that love is lord in the divine will, not that the will of God is sovereign
over his love. God's omnipotence, as Dorner would say, exists for his love.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) From our own moral constitution,&mdash;in which conscience asserts its
supremacy over every other impulse and affection of our nature. As we
may be kind, but must be righteous, so God, in whose image we are made,
may be merciful, but must be holy.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See Bishop Butler's Sermons upon Human Nature, Bohn's ed., 385-414, showing <q>the
supremacy of conscience in the moral constitution of man.</q> We must be just, before
we are generous. So with God, justice must be done always; mercy is optional with
him. He was not under obligation to provide a redemption for sinners: <emph>2 Pet. 2:4&mdash;<q>God
spared not angels when they sinned, but cast them down to hell.</q></emph> Salvation is a matter of grace, not of
debt. Shedd, Discourses and Essays, 277-298&mdash;<q>The quality of justice is necessary exaction;
but <q>the quality of mercy is not (con)strained</q></q> [<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Denham: <q>His mirth is
forced and strained</q>]. God can apply the salvation, after he has wrought it out, to
whomsoever he will: <emph>Rom. 9:18&mdash;<q>he hath mercy on whom he will.</q></emph> Young, Night-Thoughts,
4:233&mdash;<q>A God all mercy is a God unjust.</q> Emerson: <q>Your goodness must have
some edge to it; else it is none.</q> Martineau, Study, 2:100&mdash;<q>No one can be just
without subordinating Pity to the sense of Right.</q>
</p>

<p>
We may learn of God's holiness <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign>. Even the heathen could say <q>Fiat justitia,
ruat cœlum,</q> or <q>pereat mundus.</q> But, for our knowledge of God's mercy, we are
dependent upon special revelation. Mercy, like omnipotence, may exist in God without
being exercised. Mercy is not grace but debt, if God owes the exercise of it either
to the sinner or to himself; <hi rend='italic'>versus</hi> G. B. Stevens, in New Eng., 1888:421-443. <q>But justice
is an attribute which not only <emph>exists</emph> of necessity, but must be <emph>exercised</emph> of necessity;
because not to exercise it would be injustice</q>; see Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:218, 219, 389,
390; 2:402, and Sermons to Nat. Man, 366. If it be said that, by parity of reasoning, for
God not to exercise mercy is to show himself unmerciful,&mdash;we reply that this is not
true so long as higher interests require that exercise to be withheld. I am not unmerciful
when I refuse to give the poor the money needed to pay an honest debt; nor is the
Governor unmerciful when he refuses to pardon the condemned and unrepentant
criminal. Mercy has its conditions, as we proceed to show, and it does not cease to <emph>be</emph>
when these conditions do not permit it to <emph>be exercised</emph>. Not so with justice: justice
must always be exercised; when it ceases to <emph>be exercised</emph>, it also ceases to <emph>be</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The story of the prodigal shows a love that ever reaches out after the son in the far
country, but which is ever conditioned by the father's holiness and restrained from
acting until the son has voluntarily forsaken his riotous living. A just father may
banish a corrupt son from the household, yet may love him so tenderly that his banishment
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
causes exquisite pain. E. G. Robinson: <q>God, Christ and the Holy Spirit have a
conscience, that is, they distinguish between right and wrong.</q> E. H. Johnson, Syst.
Theology, 85, 86&mdash;<q>Holiness is primary as respects benevolence; for (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Holiness is
itself moral excellence, while the moral excellence of benevolence can be explained.
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Holiness is an attribute of being, while benevolence is an attribute of action; but
action presupposes and is controlled by being. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Benevolence must take counsel of
holiness, since for a being to desire aught contrary to holiness would be to wish him harm,
while that which holiness leads God to seek, benevolence finds best for the creature.
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The Mosaic dispensation elaborately symbolized, and the Christian dispensation
makes provision to meet, the requirements of holiness as supreme; <emph>James 3:17</emph>&mdash;<q><emph>First pure,
then</emph> [by consequence] <emph>peaceable</emph>.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
We are <q><emph>to do justly</emph>,</q> as well as <emph><q>to love kindness, and to walk humbly with</q></emph> our God (<emph>Micah 6:8</emph>).
Dr. Samuel Johnson: <q>It is surprising to find how much more kindness than justice
society contains.</q> There is a sinful mercy. A School Commissioner finds it terrible
work to listen to the pleas of incompetent teachers begging that they may not be dismissed,
and he can nerve himself for it only by remembering the children whose education
may be affected by his refusal to do justice. Love and pity are not the whole of
Christian duty, nor are they the ruling attributes of God.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) From the actual dealings of God,&mdash;in which holiness conditions
and limits the exercise of other attributes. Thus, for example, in Christ's
redeeming work, though love makes the atonement, it is violated holiness
that requires it; and in the eternal punishment of the wicked, the demand
of holiness for self-vindication overbears the pleading of love for the sufferers.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Love cannot be the fundamental attribute of God, because love always requires a norm
or standard, and this norm or standard is found only in holiness; <emph>Phil. 1:9&mdash;<q>And this I
pray, that your love may abound yet more in knowledge and all discernment</q></emph>; see A. H. Strong, Christ in
Creation, 388-405. That which conditions all is highest of all. Holiness shows itself higher
than love, in that it conditions love. Hence God's mercy does not consist in outraging
his own law of holiness, but in enduring the penal affliction by which that law of holiness
is satisfied. Conscience in man is but the reflex of holiness in God. Conscience
demands either retribution or atonement. This demand Christ meets by his substituted
suffering. His sacrifice assuages the thirst of conscience in man, as well as the
demand of holiness in God: <emph>John 6:55&mdash;<q>For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.</q></emph>
See Shedd, Discourses and Essays, 280, 291, 292; Dogmatic Theology, 1:377, 378&mdash;<q>The
sovereignty and freedom of God in respect to justice relates not to the <emph>abolition</emph>, nor to
the <emph>relaxation</emph>, but to the <emph>substitution</emph>, of punishment. It does not consist in any power
to violate or waive legal claims. The exercise of the other attributes of God is regulated
and conditioned by that of justice.... Where then is the mercy of God, in case
justice is strictly satisfied by a vicarious person? There is mercy in <emph>permitting</emph> another
person to do for the sinner what the sinner is bound to do for himself; and greater
mercy in <emph>providing</emph> that person; and still greater mercy in <emph>becoming</emph> that person.</q>
</p>

<p>
Enthusiasm, like fire, must not only burn, but must be controlled. Man invented
chimneys to keep in the heat but to let out the smoke. We need the walls of discretion
and self-control to guide the flaming of our love. The holiness of God is the regulating
principle of his nature. The ocean of his mercy is bounded by the shores of his justice.
Even if holiness be God's self-love, in the sense of God's self-respect or self-preservation,
still this self-love must condition love to creatures. Only as God maintains himself
in his holiness, can he have anything of worth to give; love indeed is nothing but
the self-communication of holiness. And if we say, with J. M. Whiton, that self-affirmation
in a universe in which God is immanent is itself a form of self-impartation, still
this form of self-impartation must condition and limit that other form of self-impartation
which we call love to creatures. See Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 1:137-155, 346-353;
Patton, art. on Retribution and the Divine Goodness, in Princeton Rev.,
Jan. 1878:8-16; Owen, Dissertation on the Divine Justice, in Works, 10: 483-624.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) From God's eternal purpose of salvation,&mdash;in which justice and
mercy are reconciled only through the foreseen and predetermined sacrifice
of Christ. The declaration that Christ is <q>the Lamb ... slain from
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
the foundation of the world</q> implies the existence of a principle in the
divine nature which requires satisfaction, before God can enter upon the
work of redemption. That principle can be none other than holiness.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Since both mercy and justice are exercised toward sinners of the human race, the
otherwise inevitable antagonism between them is removed only by the atoning death
of the God-man. Their opposing claims do not impair the divine blessedness, because
the reconciliation exists in the eternal counsels of God. This is intimated in <emph>Rev. 13:8&mdash;<q>the
Lamb that hath been slain from the foundation of the world.</q></emph> This same reconciliation is alluded
to in <emph>Ps. 85:10&mdash;<q>Mercy and truth are met together; Righteousness and peace have kissed each other</q></emph>; and in
<emph>Rom. 3:26&mdash;<q>that he might himself be just, and the justifier of him that hath faith in Jesus.</q></emph> The atonement,
then, if man was to be saved, was necessary, not primarily on man's account, but on
God's account. Shedd, Discourses and Essays, 279&mdash;The sacrifice of Christ was an
<q>atonement <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ab intra</foreign>, a self-oblation on the part of Deity himself, by which to satisfy
those immanent and eternal imperatives of the divine nature which without it must
find their satisfaction in the punishment of the transgressor, or else be outraged.</q>
Thus God's word of redemption, as well as his word of creation, is forever <emph><q>settled in
heaven</q> (Ps. 119:89)</emph>. Its execution on the cross was <emph><q>according to the pattern</q></emph> on high. The
Mosaic sacrifice prefigured the sacrifice of Christ; but the sacrifice of Christ was but
the temporal disclosure of an eternal fact in the nature of God. See Kreibig, Versöhnung,
155, 156.
</p>

<p>
God requires satisfaction because he is holiness, but he makes satisfaction because he
is love. The Judge himself, with all his hatred of transgression, still loves the transgressor,
and comes down from the bench to take the criminal's place and bear his penalty.
But this is an eternal provision and an eternal sacrifice. <emph>Heb. 9:14&mdash;<q>the blood of Christ,
who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish unto God.</q></emph> Matheson, Voices of the Spirit,
215, 216&mdash;<q>Christ's sacrifice was offered through the Spirit. It was not wrung from a
reluctant soul through obedience to outward law; it came from the inner heart, from
the impulse of undying love. It was a completed offering before Calvary began; it
was seen by the Father before it was seen by the world. It was finished in the Spirit,
ere it began in the flesh, finished in the hour when Christ exclaimed: <emph><q>not as I will, but as
thou wilt</q> (Mat. 26:39).</emph></q>
</p>

<p>
Lang, Homer, 506&mdash;<q>Apollo is the bringer of pestilence and the averter of pestilence,
in accordance with the well-known rule that the two opposite attributes should
be combined in the same deity.</q> Lord Bacon, Confession of Faith: <q>Neither angel,
man nor world, could stand or can stand one moment in God's sight without beholding
the same in the face of a Mediator; and therefore before him, with whom all things
are present, the Lamb of God was slain before all worlds; without which eternal counsel
of his, it was impossible for him to have descended to any work of creation.</q> Orr,
Christian View of God and the World, 819&mdash;<q>Creation is built on redemption lines</q>&mdash;which
is to say that incarnation and atonement were included in God's original design
of the world.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. The holiness of God the ground of moral obligation.</head>

<p>
A. Erroneous Views. The ground of moral obligation is not
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) In power,&mdash;whether of civil law (Hobbes, Gassendi), or of divine
will (Occam, Descartes). We are not bound to obey either of these,
except upon the ground that they are right. This theory assumes that
nothing is good or right in itself, and that morality is mere prudence.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Civil law</hi>: See Hobbes, Leviathan, part i, chap. 6 and 13; part ii, chap. 30; Gassendi,
Opera, 6:120. Upon this view, might makes right; the laws of Nero are always binding;
a man may break his promise when civil law permits; there is no obligation to
obey a father, a civil governor, or God himself, when once it is certain that the disobedience
will be hidden, or when the offender is willing to incur the punishment. Martineau,
Seat of Authority, 67&mdash;<q>Mere magnitude of scale carries no moral quality; nor
could a whole population of devils by unanimous ballot confer righteousness upon
their will, or make it binding upon a single Abdiel.</q> Robert Browning, Christmas Eve,
xvii&mdash;<q>Justice, good, and truth were still Divine if, by some demon's will, Hatred and
wrong had been proclaimed Law through the world, and right misnamed.</q>
</p>

<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Divine will</hi>: See Occam, lib. 2, quæs. 19 (quoted in Porter, Moral Science, 125); Descartes
(referred to in Hickok, Moral Science, 27, 28); Martineau, Types, 148&mdash;<q>Descartes
held that the will of God is not the revealer but the inventor of moral distinctions.
God could have made Euclid a farrago of lies, and Satan a model of moral perfection.</q>
Upon this view, right and wrong are variable quantities. Duns Scotus held that God's
will makes not only truth but right. God can make lying to be virtuous and purity to
be wrong. If Satan were God, we should be bound to obey him. God is essentially
indifferent to right and wrong, good and evil. We reply that behind the divine will is
the divine nature, and that in the moral perfection of that nature lies the only ground
of moral obligation. God pours forth his love and exerts his power in accordance with
some determining principle in his own nature. That principle is not happiness. Finney,
Syst. Theology, 936, 937&mdash;<q>Could God's command make it obligatory upon us to will
evil to him? If not, then his will is not the ground of moral obligation. The thing
that is most valuable, namely, the highest good of God and of the universe must be
both the end and the ground. It is the divine reason and not the divine will that perceives
and affirms the law of conduct. The divine will publishes, but does not originate,
the rule. God's will could not make vice to be virtuous.</q>
</p>

<p>
As between power or utility on the one hand, and right on the other hand, we must
regard right as the more fundamental. We do not, however, as will be seen further on,
place the ground of moral obligation even in right, considered as an abstract principle;
but place it rather in the moral excellence of him who is the personal Right and therefore
the source of right. Character obliges, and the master often bows in his heart to
the servant, when this latter is the nobler man.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Nor in utility,&mdash;whether our own happiness or advantage present
or eternal (Paley), for supreme regard for our own interest is not virtuous;
or the greatest happiness or advantage to being in general (Edwards),
for we judge conduct to be useful because it is right, not right because it is
useful. This theory would compel us to believe that in eternity past God
was holy only because of the good he got from it,&mdash;that is, there was no
such thing as holiness in itself, and no such thing as moral character in God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Our own happiness</hi>: Paley, Mor. and Pol. Philos., book i, chap. vii&mdash;<q>Virtue is the
doing good to mankind, in obedience to the will of God, and for the sake of everlasting
happiness.</q> This unites (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) and (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>). John Stuart Mill and Dr. N. W. Taylor held
that our own happiness is the supreme end. These writers indeed regard the highest
happiness as attained only by living for others (Mill's altruism), but they can assign
no reason why one who knows no other happiness than the pleasures of sense should
not adopt the maxim of Epicurus, who, according to Lucretius, taught that <q>ducit
quemque voluptas.</q> This theory renders virtue impossible; for a virtue which is mere
regard to our own interest is not virtue but prudence. <q>We have a sense of right and
wrong independently of all considerations of happiness or its loss.</q> James Mill held
that the utility is not the criterion of the morality but itself constitutes the morality.
G. B. Foster well replies that virtue is not mere egoistic sagacity, and the moral act is
not simply a clever business enterprise. All languages distinguish between virtue and
prudence. To say that the virtues are great utilities is to confound the effect with the
cause. Carlyle says that a man can do without happiness. Browning, Red Cotton
Nightcap Country: <q>Thick heads ought to recognize The devil, that old stager, at his
trick Of general utility, who leads Downward perhaps, but fiddles all the way.</q> This
is the morality of Mother Goose: <q>He put in his thumb, And pulled out a plum, And
said, <q>What a good boy am I!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
E. G. Robinson, Principles and Practice of Morality, 160&mdash;<q>Utility has nothing ultimate
in itself, and therefore can furnish no ground of obligation. Utility is mere fitness
of one thing to minister to something else.</q> To say that things are right because
they are useful, is like saying that things are beautiful because they are pleasing.
Martineau, Types of Ethical Theory, 2:170, 511, 556&mdash;<q>The moment the appetites pass
into the self-conscious state, and become ends instead of impulses, they draw to themselves
terms of censure.... So intellectual conscientiousness, or strict submission of
the mind to evidence, has its inspiration in pure love of truth, and would not survive an
hour if entrusted to the keeping either of providence or of social affection....
Instincts, which provide for they know not what, are proof that <emph>want</emph> is the original
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
impulse to action, instead of pleasure being the end.</q> On the happiness theory, appeals
to self-interest on behalf of religion ought to be effective,&mdash;as a matter of fact few are
moved by them.
</p>

<p>
Dewey, Psychology, 300, 362&mdash;<q>Emotion turned inward eats up itself. Live on feelings
rather than on the things to which feelings belong, and you defeat your own end,
exhaust your power of feeling, commit emotional suicide. Hence arise cynicism, the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>nil admirari</foreign> spirit, restless searching for the latest sensation. The only remedy is to get
outside of self, to devote self to some worthy object, not for feeling's sake but for the
sake of the object.... We do not desire an object because it gives us pleasure, but it
gives us pleasure because it satisfies the impulse which, in connection with the idea of
the object, constitutes the desire.... Pleasure is the accompaniment of the activity or
development of the <emph>self</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Salter, First Steps in Philosophy, 150&mdash;<q>It is right to aim at happiness. Happiness is
an end. Utilitarianism errs in making happiness the only and the highest end. It
exalts a state of feeling into the supremely desirable thing. Intuitionalism gives the
same place to a state of will. The truth includes both. The true end is the highest
development of being, self and others, the realization of the divine idea, God in man.</q>
Bowne, Principles of Ethics, 96&mdash;<q>The standard of appeal is not the actual happiness
of the actual man but the normal happiness of the normal man.... Happiness must
have a law. But then also the law must lead to happiness.... The true ethical aim
is to realize the good. But then the contents of this good have to be determined in
accordance with an inborn ideal of human worth and dignity.... Not all good, but
the true good, not the things which please, but the things which should please, are to
be the aim of action.</q>
</p>

<p>
Bixby, Crisis of Morals, 223&mdash;<q>The Utilitarian is really asking about the wisest
method of embodying the ideal. He belongs to that second stage in which the moral
artist considers through what material and in what form and color he may best realize
his thought. What the ideal is, and why it is the highest, he does not tell us. Morality
begins, not in feeling, but in reason. And reason is impersonal. It discerns the moral
equality of personalities.</q> Genung, Epic of the Inner Life, 20&mdash;Job speaks out his
character like one of Robert Browning's heroes. He teaches that <q>there is a service of
God which is not work for reward: it is a heart-loyalty, a hunger after God's presence,
which survives loss and chastisement; which in spite of contradictory seeming cleaves
to what is godlike as the needle seeks the pole; and which reaches up out of the darkness
and hardness of this life into the light and love beyond.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Greatest good of being</hi>: Not only Edwards, but Priestley, Bentham, Dwight, Finney,
Hopkins, Fairchild, hold this view. See Edwards, Works, 2:261-304&mdash;<q>Virtue is benevolence
toward being in general</q>; Dwight, Theology, 3:150-162&mdash;<q>Utility the foundation
of Virtue</q>; Hopkins, Law of Love, 7-28; Fairchild, Moral Philosophy; Finney,
Syst. Theol., 42-135. This theory regards good as a mere state of the sensibility, instead
of consisting in purity of being. It forgets that in eternity past <q>love for being in
general</q> = simply God's self-love, or God's regard for his own happiness. This implies
that God is holy only for a purpose; he is bound to be unholy, if greater good would
result; that is, holiness has no independent existence in his nature. We grant that a
thing is often known to be right by the fact that it is useful; but this is very different
from saying that its usefulness makes it right. <q>Utility is only the setting of the diamond,
which <emph>marks</emph>, but does not <emph>make</emph>, its value.</q> <q>If utility be a criterion of rectitude,
it is only because it is a revelation of the divine nature.</q> See British Quarterly,
July, 1877, on Matthew Arnold and Bishop Butler. Bp. Butler, Nature of Virtue, in
Works, Bohn's ed., 334&mdash;<q>Benevolence is the true self-love.</q> Love and holiness are
obligatory in themselves, and not because they promote the general good. Cicero well
said that they who confounded the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>honestum</foreign> with the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>utile</foreign> deserved to be banished
from society. See criticism on Porter's Moral Science, in Lutheran Quarterly, Apr.
1885:325-331; also F. L. Patton, on Metaphysics of Oughtness, in Presb. Rev., 1886:127-150.
</p>

<p>
Encyc. Britannica, 7:690, on Jonathan Edwards&mdash;<q>Being in general, being without
any qualities, is too abstract a thing to be the primary cause of love. The feeling
which Edwards refers to is not love, but awe or reverence, and moreover necessarily
a blind awe. Properly stated therefore, true virtue, according to Edwards, would consist
in a blind awe of being in general,&mdash;only this would be inconsistent with his definition
of virtue as existing in God. In reality, as he makes virtue merely the second
object of love, his theory becomes identical with that utilitarian theory with which the
names of Hume, Bentham and Mill are associated.</q> Hodge, Essays, 275&mdash;<q>If obligation
is due primarily to being in general, then there is no more virtue in loving God&mdash;willing
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
his good&mdash;than there is in loving Satan. But love to Christ differs in its nature
from benevolence toward the devil.</q> Plainly virtue consists, not in love for mere
being, but in love for good being, or in other words, in love for the holy God. Not the
greatest good of being, but the holiness of God, is the ground of moral obligation.
</p>

<p>
Dr. E. A. Park interprets the Edwardian theory as holding that virtue is love to all
beings according to their value, love of the greater therefore more than the less, <q>love
to particular beings in a proportion compounded of the degree of being and the degree
of virtue or benevolence to being which they have.</q> Love is choice. Happiness, says
Park, is not the sole good, much less the happiness of creatures. The <emph>greatest</emph> good is
holiness, though the <emph>last</emph> good aimed at is happiness. Holiness is disinterested love&mdash;free
choice of the general above the private good. But we reply that this gives us no
reason or standard for virtue. It does not tell us what is good nor why we should
choose it. Martineau, Types, 2:70, 77, 471, 484&mdash;<q>Why should I promote the general
well-being? Why should I sacrifice myself for others? Only because this is godlike.
It Would never have been prudent to do right, had it not been something infinitely
more.... It is not fitness that makes an act moral, but it is its morality that makes
it fit.</q>
</p>

<p>
Herbert Spencer must be classed as a utilitarian. He says that justice requires that
<q>every man be free to do as he wills provided he infringes not the equal freedom of
every other man.</q> But, since this would permit injury to another by one willing to
submit to injury in return, Mr. Spencer limits the freedom to <q>such actions as subserve
life.</q> This is practically equivalent to saying that the greatest sum of happiness is the
ultimate end. On Jonathan Edwards, see Robert Hall, Works, 1:43 sq.; Alexander,
Moral Science, 194-198; Bib. Repertory (Princeton Review), 25:22; Bib. Sacra, 9:176,
197; 10:403, 705.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Nor in the nature of things (Price),&mdash;whether by this we mean their
fitness (Clarke), truth (Wollaston), order (Jouffroy), relations (Wayland),
worthiness (Hickok), sympathy (Adam Smith), or abstract right (Haven
and Alexander); for this nature of things is not ultimate, but has its ground
in the nature of God. We are bound to worship the highest; if anything
exists beyond and above God, we are bound to worship that,&mdash;that indeed
is God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See Wayland, Moral Science, 33-48; Hickok, Moral Science, 27-34; Haven, Moral Philosophy,
27-50; Alexander, Moral Science, 159-198. In opposition to all the forms of this
theory, we urge that nothing exists independently of or above God. <q>If the ground of
morals exist independently of God, either it has ultimately no authority, or it usurps
the throne of the Almighty. Any rational being who kept the law would be perfect
without God, and the moral centre of all intelligences would be outside of God</q>
(Talbot). God is not a Jupiter controlled by Fate. He is subject to no law but the law
of his own nature. <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Noblesse oblige</foreign>,&mdash;character rules,&mdash;purity is the highest. And
therefore to holiness all creatures, voluntarily or involuntarily, are constrained to
bow. Hopkins, Law of Love, 77&mdash;<q>Right and wrong have nothing to do with things,
but only with actions; nothing to do with any nature of things existing necessarily,
but only with the nature of persons.</q> Another has said: <q>The idea of right cannot
be original, since right means conformity to some standard or rule.</q> This standard or
rule is not an abstraction, but an existing being&mdash;the infinitely perfect God.
</p>

<p>
Faber: <q>For right is right, since God is God; And right the day must win; To doubt
would be disloyalty, To falter would be sin.</q> Tennyson: <q>And because right is right,
to follow right Were wisdom in the scorn of consequence.</q> Right is right, and I
should will the right, not because God <emph>wills</emph> it, but because God <emph>is</emph> it. E. G. Robinson,
Principles and Practice of Morality, 178-180&mdash;<q>Utility and relations simply reveal the
constitution of things and so represent God. Moral law was not made for purposes of
utility, nor do relations constitute the reason for obligation. They only show what the
nature of God is who made the universe and revealed himself in it. In his nature is
found the <emph>reason</emph> for morality.</q> S. S. Times, Oct. 17, 1891&mdash;<q>Only that is level which
conforms to the curvature of the earth's surface. A straight line tangent to the
earth's curve would at its ends be much further from the earth's centre than at its
middle. Now equity means levelness. The standard of equity is not an impersonal
thing, a 'nature of things' outside of God. Equity or righteousness is no more to be
conceived independently of the divine centre of the moral world than is levelness comprehensible
apart from the earth's centre.</q>
</p>

<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>

<p>
Since God finds the rule and limitation of his action solely in his own being, and his
love is conditioned by his holiness, we must differ from such views as that of Moxom:
<q>Whether we define God's nature as perfect holiness or perfect love is immaterial,
since his nature is manifested only through his action, that is, through his relation to
other beings. Most of our reasoning on the divine standard of righteousness, or the
ultimate ground of moral obligation, is reasoning in a circle, since we must always go
back to God for the principle of his action; which principle we can know only
by means of his action. God, the perfectly righteous Being, is the ideal standard of
human righteousness. Righteousness in man therefore is conformity to the nature of
God. God, in agreement with his perfect nature, always wills the perfectly good
toward man. His righteousness is an expression of his love; his love is a manifestation
of his righteousness.</q>
</p>

<p>
So Newman Smyth: <q>Righteousness is the eternal genuineness of the divine love. It
is not therefore an independent excellence, to be contrasted with, or even put in opposition
to, benevolence; it is an essential part of love.</q> In reply to which we urge as
before that that which is the object of love, that which limits and conditions love, that
which furnishes the norm and reason for love, cannot itself be love, nor hold merely
equal rank with love. A double standard is as irrational in ethics as in commerce, and
it leads in ethics to the same debasement of the higher values, and the same unsettling
of relations, as has resulted in our currency from the attempt to make silver regulate
gold at the same time that gold regulates silver.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The Scriptural View.&mdash;According to the Scriptures, the ground of
moral obligation is the holiness of God, or the moral perfection of the
divine nature, conformity to which is the law of our moral being (Robinson,
Chalmers, Calderwood, Gregory, Wuttke). We show this:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) From the commands: <q>Ye shall be holy,</q> where the ground of
obligation assigned is simply and only: <q>for I am holy</q> (1 Pet. 1:16);
and <q>Ye therefore shall be perfect,</q> where the standard laid down is: <q>as
your heavenly Father is perfect</q> (Mat. 5:48). Here we have an ultimate
reason and ground for being and doing right, namely, that God is right, or,
in other words, that holiness is his nature.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) From the nature of the love in which the whole law is summed up
(Mat. 22:37&mdash;<q>Thou shalt love the Lord thy God</q>; Rom. 13:10&mdash;<q>love
therefore is the fulfilment of the law</q>). This love is not regard for
abstract right or for the happiness of being, much less for one's own
interest, but it is regard for God as the fountain and standard of moral
excellence, or in other words, love for God as holy. Hence this love is
the principle and source of holiness in man.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) From the example of Christ, whose life was essentially an exhibition
of supreme regard for God, and of supreme devotion to his holy will.
As Christ saw nothing good but what was in God (Mark 10:18&mdash;<q>none
is good save one, even God</q>), and did only what he saw the Father do
(John 5:19; see also 30&mdash;<q>I seek not mine own will, but the will of him
that sent me</q>), so for us, to be like God is the sum of all duty, and God's
infinite moral excellence is the supreme reason why we should be like him.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
For statements of the correct view of the ground of moral obligation, see E. G.
Robinson, Principles and Practice of Morality, 138-180; Chalmers, Moral Philosophy,
412-420; Calderwood, Moral Philosophy; Gregory, Christian Ethics, 112-122; Wuttke,
Christian Ethics, 2:80-107; Talbot, Ethical Prolegomena, in Bap. Quar., July, 1877:257-274&mdash;<q>The
ground of all moral law is the nature of God, or the ethical nature of God in
relation to the like nature in man, or the imperativeness of the divine nature.</q> Plato:
<q>The divine will is the fountain of all efficiency; the divine reason is the fountain, of
all law; the divine nature is the fountain of all virtue.</q> If it be said that God is love
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
as well as holiness, we ask: Love to what? And the only answer is: Love to the right,
or to holiness. To ask why right is a good, is no more sensible than to ask why happiness
is a good. There must be something ultimate. Schiller said there are people who
want to know why ten is not twelve. We cannot study character apart from conduct,
nor conduct apart from character. But this does not prevent us from recognizing
that character is the fundamental thing and that conduct is only the expression of it.
</p>

<p>
The moral perfection of the divine nature includes truth and love, but since it is
holiness that conditions the exercise of every other attribute, we must conclude that
holiness is the ground of moral obligation. Infinity also unites with holiness to make
it the perfect ground, but since the determining element is holiness, we call this, and
not infinity, the ground of obligation. J. H. Harris, Baccalaureate Sermon, Bucknell
University, 1890&mdash;<q>As holiness is the fundamental attribute of God, so holiness is the
supreme good of man. Aristotle perceived this when he declared the chief good of
man to be energizing according to virtue. Christianity supplies the Holy Spirit and
makes this energizing possible.</q> Holiness is the goal of man's spiritual career; see
<emph>1 Thess. 3:13&mdash;<q>to the end he may establish your hearts unblamable in holiness before our God and Father.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
Arthur H. Hallam, in John Brown's Rab and his Friends, 272&mdash;<q>Holiness and happiness
are two notions of one thing.... Unless therefore the heart of a created being
is at one with the heart of God, it cannot but be miserable.</q> It is more true to say
that holiness and happiness are, as cause and effect, inseparably bound together.
Martineau, Types, 1:xvi; 2:70-77&mdash;<q>Two classes of facts it is indispensable for us to
know: what are the springs of voluntary conduct, and what are its effects</q>; Study,
1:26&mdash;<q>Ethics must either perfect themselves in Religion, or disintegrate themselves
into Hedonism.</q> William Law remarks: <q>Ethics are not external but internal. The
essence of a moral act does not lie in its result, but in the motive from which it springs.
And that again is good or bad, according as it conforms to the character of God.</q> For
further discussion of the subject see our chapter on The Law of God. See also Thornwell,
Theology, 1:363-373; Hinton, Art of Thinking, 47-62; Goldwin Smith, in Contemporary
Review, March, 1882, and Jan. 1884; H. B. Smith, System of Theology, 195-231,
esp. 223.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Doctrine Of The Trinity.</head>

<p>
In the nature of the one God there are three eternal distinctions which
are represented to us under the figure of persons, and these three are
equal. This tripersonality of the Godhead is exclusively a truth of revelation.
It is clearly, though not formally, made known in the New Testament,
and intimations of it may be found in the Old.
</p>

<p>
The doctrine of the Trinity may be expressed in the six following
statements: 1. In Scripture there are three who are recognized as God.
2. These three are so described in Scripture that we are compelled to conceive
of them as distinct persons. 3. This tripersonality of the divine
nature is not merely economic and temporal, but is immanent and eternal.
4. This tripersonality is not tritheism; for while there are three persons,
there is but one essence. 5. The three persons, Father, Son and Holy
Spirit, are equal. 6. Inscrutable yet not self-contradictory, this doctrine
furnishes the key to all other doctrines.&mdash;These statements we proceed now
to prove and to elucidate.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Reason shows us the Unity of God; only revelation shows us the Trinity of God,
thus filling out the indefinite outlines of this Unity and vivifying it. The term
<q>Trinity</q> is not found in Scripture, although the conception it expresses is Scriptural.
The invention of the term is ascribed to Tertullian. The Montanists first defined the
personality of the Spirit, and first formulated the doctrine of the Trinity. The term
<q>Trinity</q> is not a metaphysical one. It is only a designation of four facts: (1) the
Father is God; (2) the Son is God; (3) the Spirit is God; (4) there is but one God.
</p>

<p>
Park: <q>The doctrine of the Trinity does not on the one hand assert that three persons
are united in one person, or three beings in one being, or three Gods in one God
(tritheism); nor on the other hand that God merely manifests himself in three different
ways (modal trinity, or trinity of manifestations); but rather that there are three
eternal distinctions in the substance of God.</q> Smyth, preface to Edwards, Observations
on the Trinity: <q>The church doctrine of the Trinity affirms that there are in
the Godhead three distinct hypostases or subsistences&mdash;the Father, the Son and the
Holy Spirit&mdash;each possessing one and the same divine nature, though in a different
manner. The essential points are (1) the unity of essence; (2) the reality of immanent
or ontological distinctions.</q> See Park on Edwards's View of the Trinity, in Bib.
Sac., April, 1881:333. Princeton Essays, 1:28&mdash;<q>There is one God; Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit are this one God; there is such a distinction between Father, Son and
Holy Spirit as to lay a sufficient ground for the reciprocal use of the personal pronouns.</q>
Joseph Cook: <q>(1) The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one God;
(2) each has a peculiarity incommunicable to the others; (3) neither is God without
the others; (4) each, with the others, is God.</q>
</p>

<p>
We regard the doctrine of the Trinity as implicitly held by the apostles and as
involved in the New Testament declarations with regard to Father, Son and Holy Spirit,
while we concede that the doctrine had not by the New Testament writers been formulated.
They held it, as it were in solution; only time, reflection, and the shock of controversy
and opposition, caused it to crystalize into definite and dogmatic form.
Chadwick, Old and New Unitarianism, 59, 60, claims that the Jewish origin of Christianity
shows that the Jewish Messiah could not originally have been conceived of as
divine. If Jesus had claimed this, he would not have been taken before Pilate,&mdash;the
Jews would have dispatched him. The doctrine of the Trinity, says Chadwick, was not
developed until the Council of Nice, 325. E. G. Robinson: <q>There was no doctrine of
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
the Trinity in the Patristic period, as there was no doctrine of the Atonement before
Anselm.</q> The Outlook, Notes and Queries, March 30, 1901&mdash;<q>The doctrine of the
Trinity cannot be said to have taken final shape before the appearance of the so-called
Athanasian Creed in the 8th or 9th century. The Nicene Creed, formulated in the 4th
century, is termed by Dr. Schaff, from the orthodox point of view, <q>semi-trinitarian.</q>
The earliest time known at which Jesus was deified was, after the New Testament
writers, in the letters of Ignatius, at the beginning of the second century.</q>
</p>

<p>
Gore, Incarnation, 179&mdash;<q>The doctrine of the Trinity is not so much heard, as overheard,
in the statements of Scripture.</q> George P. Fisher quotes some able and pious
friend of his as saying: <q>What meets us in the New Testament is the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>disjecta membra</foreign>
of the Trinity.</q> G. B. Foster: <q>The doctrine of the Trinity is the Christian attempt
to make intelligible the personality of God without dependence upon the world.</q>
Charles Kingsley said that, whether the doctrine of the Trinity is in the Bible or no, it
ought to be there, because our spiritual nature cries out for it. Shedd, Dogmatic
Theology, 1:250&mdash;<q>Though the doctrine of the Trinity is not discoverable by human
reason, it is susceptible of a rational defense, when revealed.</q> On New England Trinitarianism,
see New World, June, 1896:272-295&mdash;art. by Levi L. Paine. He says that
the last phase of it is represented by Phillips Brooks, James M. Whiton and George A.
Gordon. These hold to the essential divineness of humanity and preëminently of
Christ, the unique representative of mankind, who was, in this sense, a true incarnation
of Deity. See also, L. L. Paine, Evolution of Trinitarianism, 141, 287.
</p>

<p>
Neander declared that the Trinity is not a fundamental doctrine of Christianity. He
was speaking however of the speculative, metaphysical form which the doctrine has
assumed in theology. But he speaks very differently of the devotional and practical
form in which the Scriptures present it, as in the baptismal formula and in the apostolic
benediction. In regard to this he says: <q>We recognize therein the essential contents
of Christianity summed up in brief.</q> Whiton, Gloria Patri, 10, 11, 55, 91, 92&mdash;<q>God
transcendent, the Father, is revealed by God immanent, the Son. This one
nature belongs equally to God, to Christ, and to mankind, and in this fact is grounded
the immutableness of moral distinctions and the possibility of moral progress....
The immanent life of the universe is one with the transcendent Power; the filial
stream is one with its paternal Fount. To Christ supremely belongs the name of Son,
which includes all that life that is begotten of God. In Christ the before unconscious
Sonship of the world awakes to consciousness of the Father. The Father is the Life
transcendent, above all; the Son is Life immanent, through all; the Holy Spirit is the
Life individualized, in all. In Christ we have collectivism; in the Holy Spirit we have
individualism; as Bunsen says: <q>The chief power in the world is personality.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
For treatment of the whole doctrine, see Dorner, System of Doctrine, 1:344-465;
Twesten, Dogmatik, and translation in Bib. Sac., 3:502; Ebrard, Dogmatik, 1:145-199;
Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 1:57-135; Kahnis, Dogmatik, 3:203-229; Shedd,
Dogm. Theol., 1:248-333, and History of Doctrine, 1:246-385; Farrar, Science and Theology,
138; Schaff, Nicene Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, in Theol. Eclectic, 4:209. For
the Unitarian view, see Norton, Statement of Reasons, and J. F. Clarke, Truths and
Errors of Orthodoxy.
</p>

</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. In Scriptures there are Three who are recognized as God.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Proofs from the New Testament.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. The Father is recognized as God.</head>

<p>
The Father is recognized as God,&mdash;and that in so great a number of
passages (such as John 6:27&mdash;<q>him the Father, even God, hath sealed,</q>
and 1 Pet. 1:2&mdash;<q>foreknowledge of God the Father</q>) that we need not
delay to adduce extended proof.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. Jesus Christ is recognized as God.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) He is expressly called God.
</p>

<p>
In John 1:1&mdash;Θεὸς ἦν ὁ λόγος&mdash;the absence of the article shows Θεός to be
the predicate (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> 4:24&mdash;πνεῦμα ὁ Θεός). This predicate precedes the verb
by way of emphasis, to indicate progress in the thought = <q>the Logos was
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
not only with God, but was God</q> (see Meyer and Luthardt, Comm. <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>).
<q>Only ὁ λόγος can be the subject, for in the whole Introduction the question
is, not who God is, but who the Logos is</q> (Godet).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Westcott in Bible Commentary, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>&mdash;<q>The predicate stands emphatically first.
It is necessarily without the article, inasmuch as it describes the nature of the Word
and does not identify his person. It would be pure Sabellianism to say: <q>The Word
was ὁ Θεός.</q> Thus in verse 1 we have set forth the Word in his absolute eternal being,
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) his existence: beyond time; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) his personal existence: in active communion with
God; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) his nature: God in essence.</q> Marcus Dods, in Expositor's Greek Testament,
<hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>: <q>The Word is distinguishable from God, yet Θεὸς ἦν ὁ λόγος&mdash;the word was God,
of divine nature; not <q>a God,</q> which to a Jewish ear would have been abominable, nor
yet identical with all that can be called God, for then the article would have been
inserted (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> 1 John 3:4).</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In John 1:18, μονογενὴς θεός&mdash;<q>the only begotten God</q>&mdash;must be regarded
as the correct reading, and as a plain ascription of absolute Deity to Christ.
He is not simply the only revealer of God, but he is himself God revealed.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>John 1:18&mdash;<q>No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten God, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath
declared him.</q></emph> In this passage, although Tischendorf (8th ed.) has μονογενὴς ὑιός, Westcott
and Hort (with א*BC*L Pesh. Syr.) read μονογενὴς Θεός and the Rev. Vers. puts
<q><emph>the only begotten God</emph></q> in the margin, though it retains <q><emph>the only begotten Son</emph></q> in the text.
Harnack says the reading μονογενὴς θεός is <q>established beyond contradiction</q>; see
Westcott, Bib. Com. on John, pages 32, 33. Here then we have a new and unmistakable
assertion of the deity of Christ. Meyer says that the apostles actually call Christ God
only in <emph>John 1:1</emph> and <emph>20:28</emph>, and that Paul never so recognizes him. But Meyer is able to
maintain his position only by calling the doxologies to Christ, in <emph>2 Tim. 4:18</emph>, <emph>Heb. 13:21</emph> and
<emph>2 Pet. 3:18</emph>, post-apostolic. See Thayer, N. T. Lexicon, on Θεός, and on μονογενής.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In John 20:28, the address of Thomas Ὁ κύριός μου καὶ ὁ θεός μου&mdash;<q>My
Lord and my God</q>&mdash;since it was unrebuked by Christ, is equivalent to an
assertion on his own part of his claim to Deity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>John 20:28&mdash;<q>Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and my God.</q></emph> This address cannot be
interpreted as a sudden appeal to God in surprise and admiration, without charging
the apostle with profanity. Nor can it be considered a mere exhibition of overwrought
enthusiasm, since it was accepted by Christ. Contrast the conduct of Paul and Barnabas
when the heathen at Lystra were bringing sacrifice to them as Jupiter and Mercury
(<emph>Acts 14:11-18</emph>). The words of Thomas, as addressed directly to Christ and as accepted
by Christ, can be regarded only as a just acknowledgment on the part of Thomas that
Christ was his Lord and his God. Alford, Commentary, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>: <q>The Socinian view
that these words are merely an exclamation is refuted (1) by the fact that no such
exclamations were in use among the Jews; (2) by the εἶπεν αὐτῷ; (3) by the impossibility
of referring the ὁ κύριός μου to another than Jesus: see <emph>verse 13</emph>; (4) by the N. T.
usage of expressing the vocative by the nominative with an article; (5) by the psychological
absurdity of such a supposition: that one just convinced of the presence of him
whom he dearly loved should, instead of addressing him, break out into an irrelevant
cry; (6) by the further absurdity of supposing that, if such were the case, the Apostle
John, who of all the sacred writers most constantly keeps in mind the object for
which he is writing, should have recorded anything so beside that object; (7) by the
intimate conjunction of πεπίστευκας.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <emph>Mat. 5:34&mdash;<q>Swear not ... by the heaven</q></emph>&mdash;swearing
by Jehovah is not mentioned, because no Jew did so swear. This exclamation of
Thomas, the greatest doubter among the twelve, is the natural conclusion of John's
gospel. The thesis <emph><q>the Word was God</q> (John 1:1)</emph> has now become part of the life and consciousness
of the apostles. <emph>Chapter 21</emph> is only an Epilogue, or Appendix, written later by
John, to correct the error that he was not to die; see Westcott, Bible Com., <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>.
The Deity of Christ is the subject of the apostle who best understood his Master.
Lyman Beecher: <q>Jesus Christ is the acting Deity of the universe.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In Rom. 9:5, the clause ὁ ὢν ἐπὶ πάντων Θεὸς εὐλογητός cannot be translated
<q>blessed be the God over all,</q> for ὢν is superfluous if the clause is a doxology;
<q>εὐλογητός precedes the name of God in a doxology, but follows it,
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
as here, in a description</q> (Hovey). The clause can therefore justly be
interpreted only as a description of the higher nature of the Christ who
had just been said, τὸ κατὰ σάρκα, or according to his lower nature, to have
had his origin from Israel (see Tholuck, Com. <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Sanday, Com. on <emph>Rom. 9:5</emph>&mdash;<q>The words would naturally refer to Christ, unless <q><emph>God</emph></q>
is so definitely a proper name that it would imply a contrast in itself. We have seen
that this is not so.</q> Hence Sanday translates: <q><emph>of whom is the Christ as concerning the flesh, who is
over all, God blessed forever</emph></q>. See President T. Dwight, in Jour. Soc. Bib. Exegesis, 1881:22-55;
<hi rend='italic'>per contra</hi>, Ezra Abbot, in the same journal, 1881:1-19, and Denney, in Expositor's Gk.
Test., <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In Titus 2:13, ἐπιφάνειαν τῆς δόξης τοῦ μεγάλου Θεοῦ καὶ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ
Χριστοῦ we regard (with Ellicott) as <q>a direct, definite, and even studied
declaration of Christ's divinity</q> = <q>the ... appearing of the glory of
our great God and Savior Jesus Christ</q> (so English Revised Version).
Ἐπιφάνεια is a term applied specially to the Son and never to the Father,
and μεγάλου is uncalled for if used of the Father, but peculiarly appropriate
if used of Christ. Upon the same principles we must interpret the similar
text 2 Pet. 1:1 (see Huther, in Meyer's Com.: <q>The close juxtaposition
indicates the author's certainty of the oneness of God and Jesus Christ</q>).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Titus 2:13&mdash;<q>looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior, Jesus Christ</q></emph>&mdash;so
the English Revised Version. The American Revisers however translate: <emph><q>the glory
of the great God and Savior</q></emph>; and Westcott and Hort bracket the word ἡμῶν. These considerations
somewhat lessen the cogency of this passage as a proof-text, yet upon the whole
the balance of argument seems to us still to incline in favor of Ellicott's interpretation
as given above.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In Heb. 1:8, πρὸς δὲ τὸν υἱόν; ὁ θρόνος σου, ὁ Θεὸς, εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα is quoted as
an address to Christ, and verse 10 which follows&mdash;<q>Thou, Lord, in the
beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth</q>&mdash;by applying to Christ
an Old Testament ascription to Jehovah, shows that ὁ Θεός, in verse 8, is
used in the sense of absolute Godhead.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It is sometimes objected that the ascription of the name God to Christ proves nothing
as to his absolute deity, since angels and even human judges are called gods, as
representing God's authority and executing his will. But we reply that, while it is
true that the name is sometimes so applied, it is always with adjuncts and in connections
which leave no doubt of its figurative and secondary meaning. When, however,
the name is applied to Christ, it is, on the contrary, with adjuncts and in connections
which leave no doubt that it signifies absolute Godhead. See <emph>Ex. 4:16&mdash;<q>thou shalt be to
him as God</q></emph>; <emph>7:1&mdash;<q>See, I have made thee as God to Pharaoh</q></emph>; <emph>22:28&mdash;<q rend='pre'>Thou shalt not revile God</q></emph>, [marg., <emph>the
judges</emph>], <emph><q rend='post'>nor curse a ruler of thy people</q></emph>; <emph>Ps. 82:1&mdash;<q>God standeth in the congregation of God; he judgeth
among the gods</q></emph> [among the mighty]; <emph>6&mdash;<q>I said, Ye are gods, And all of you sons of the Most High</q></emph>; <emph>7&mdash;<q>Nevertheless
ye shall die like men, And fall like one of the princes.</q></emph> <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <emph>John 10:34-36&mdash;<q>If he called them
gods, unto whom the word of God came</q></emph> (who were God's commissioned and appointed representatives),
how much more proper for him who is one with the Father to call himself God.
</p>

<p>
As in <emph>Ps. 82:7</emph> those who had been called gods are represented as dying, so in <emph>Ps. 97:7&mdash;<q>Worship
him, all ye gods</q></emph>&mdash;they are bidden to fall down before Jehovah. Ann. Par. Bible:
<q>Although the deities of the heathen have no positive existence, they are often
described in Scripture as if they had, and are represented as bowing down before the
majesty of Jehovah.</q> This verse is quoted in <emph>Heb. 1:6&mdash;<q>let all the angels of God worship him</q></emph>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>,
Christ. Here Christ is identified with Jehovah. The quotation is made from the
Septuagint, which has <q><emph>angels</emph></q> for <q><emph>gods</emph>.</q> <q>Its use here is in accordance with the spirit
of the Hebrew word, which includes all that human error might regard as objects of
worship.</q> Those who are figuratively and rhetorically called <q><emph>gods</emph></q> are bidden to fall
down in worship before him who is the true God, Jesus Christ. See Dick, Lectures on
Theology, 1:314; Liddon, Our Lord's Divinity, 10.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>

<p>
In 1 John 5:20&mdash;ἐσμεν ἐν τῷ ἀληθινῷ, ἐν τῷ υἱῷ αὐτοῦ Ἰησοῦ Χριστῷ. οὗτος
ἐστιν ὁ ἀληθινὸς Θεός&mdash;<q>it would be a flat repetition, after the Father had
been twice called ὁ ἀληθινός, to say now again: <q>this is ὁ ἀληθενὸς Θεός.</q> Our
being in God has its basis in Christ his Son, and this also makes it more
natural that οὖτος should be referred to υἱῷ. But ought not ὁ ἀληθενός then
to be without the article (as in John 1:1&mdash;Θεός ἦν ὁ λόγος)? No, for it is
John's purpose in 1 John 5:20 to say, not <emph>what</emph> Christ is, but <emph>who</emph> he
is. In declaring <emph>what</emph> one is, the predicate must have no article; in
declaring <emph>who</emph> one is, the predicate must have the article. St. John here
says that this Son, on whom our being in the true God rests, is this true
God himself</q> (see Ebrard, Com. <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Other passages might be here adduced, as <emph>Col. 2:9&mdash;<q>in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily</q></emph>; <emph>Phil 2:6&mdash;<q>existing in the form of God</q></emph>; but we prefer to consider these under other
heads as indirectly proving Christ's divinity. Still other passages once relied upon as
direct statements of the doctrine must be given up for textual reasons. Such are <emph>Acts
20:28</emph>, where the correct reading is in all probability not ἐκκλησίαν τοῦ Θεοῦ, but ἐκκλησίαν
τοῦ Κυρίου (so ACDE Tregelles and Tischendorf; B and א, however, have τοῦ Θεοῦ. The
Rev. Vers. continues to read <q><emph>church of God</emph></q>; Amer. Revisers, however, read <emph><q>church of the
Lord</q></emph>&mdash;see Ezra Abbot's investigation in Bib. Sac., 1876: 313-352); and <emph>1 Tim. 3:16</emph>, where
ὅς is unquestionably to be substituted for Θεός, though even here ἐφανερώθη intimates
preëxistence.
</p>

<p>
Rev. George E. Ellis, D. D., before the Unitarian Club, Boston, November, 1882&mdash;<q>Fifty
years of study, thought and reading given largely to the Bible and to the literature
which peculiarly relates to it, have brought me to this conclusion, that the book&mdash;taken
with the especial divine quality and character claimed for it, and so extensively
assigned to it, as inspired and infallible as a whole, and in all its contents&mdash;is
an Orthodox book. It yields what is called the Orthodox creed. The vast majority of
its readers, following its letter, its obvious sense, its natural meaning, and yielding to
the impression which some of its emphatic texts make upon them, find in it Orthodoxy.
Only that kind of ingenious, special, discriminative, and in candor I must add, forced
treatment, which it receives from us liberals can make the book teach anything but
Orthodoxy. The evangelical sects, so called, are clearly right in maintaining that
their view of Scripture and of its doctrines draws a deep and wide division of creed
between them and ourselves. In that earnest controversy by pamphlet warfare
between Drs. Channing and Ware on the one side, and Drs. Worcester and Woods and
Professor Stuart on the other&mdash;a controversy which wrought up the people of our community
sixty years ago more than did our recent political campaign&mdash;I am fully convinced
that the liberal contestants were worsted. Scripture exegesis, logic and argument
were clearly on the side of the Orthodox contestants. And this was so, mainly
because the liberal party put themselves on the same plane with the Orthodox in their
way of regarding and dealing with Scripture texts in their bearing upon the controversy.
Liberalism cannot vanquish Orthodoxy, if it yields to the latter in its own
way of regarding and treating the whole Bible. Martin Luther said that the Papists
burned the Bible because it was not on their side. Now I am not about to attack the
Bible because it is not on my side; but I am about to object as emphatically as I can
against a character and quality assigned to the Bible, which it does not claim for itself,
which cannot be certified for it: and the origin and growth and intensity of the fond
and superstitious influences resulting in that view we can trace distinctly to agencies
accounting for, but not warranting, the current belief. Orthodoxy cannot readjust
its creeds till it readjusts its estimate of the Scriptures. The only relief which one who
professes the Orthodox creed can find is either by forcing his ingenuity into the proof-texts
or indulging his liberty outside of them.</q>
</p>

<p>
With this confession of a noted Unitarian it is interesting to compare the opinion of
the so-called Trinitarian, Dr. Lyman Abbott, who says that the New Testament
nowhere calls Christ God, but everywhere calls him man, as in <emph>1 Tim. 2:5&mdash;<q>for there is one
God, one mediator also between God and men, himself man, Christ Jesus.</q></emph> On this passage Prof. L. L. Paine
remarks in the New World, Dec. 1894&mdash;<q>That Paul ever confounded Christ with God
himself, or regarded him as in any way the Supreme Divinity, is a position invalidated
not only by direct statements, but also by the whole drift of his epistles.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Old Testament descriptions of God are applied to him.
</p>

<p>
This application to Christ of titles and names exclusively appropriated
to God is inexplicable, if Christ was not regarded as being himself God.
The peculiar awe with which the term <q>Jehovah</q> was set apart by a nation
of strenuous monotheists as the sacred and incommunicable name of the
one self-existent and covenant-keeping God forbids the belief that the
Scripture writers could have used it as the designation of a subordinate
and created being.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Mat. 3:3&mdash;<q>Make ye ready the way of the Lord</q></emph>&mdash;is a quotation from <emph>Is. 40:3&mdash;<q>Prepare ye ... the
way of Jehovah.</q></emph> <emph>John 12:41&mdash;<q>These things said Isaiah, because he saw his glory; and he spake of him</q></emph> [<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>,
Christ]&mdash;refers to <emph>Is. 6:1&mdash;<q>In the year that King Uzziah died I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne.</q></emph> So in
<emph>Eph. 4:7, 8&mdash;<q>measure of the gift of Christ ... led captivity captive</q></emph>&mdash;is an application to Christ of
what is said of Jehovah in <emph>Ps. 68:18</emph>. In <emph>1 Pet. 3:15</emph>, moreover, we read, with all the great
uncials, several of the Fathers, and all the best versions: <emph><q>sanctify in your hearts Christ as Lord</q></emph>;
here the apostle borrows his language from <emph>Is. 8:13</emph>, where we read: <q><emph>Jehovah of hosts, him
shall ye sanctify</emph>.</q> When we remember that, with the Jews, God's covenant-title was so
sacred that for the Kethib (= <q>written</q>) <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Jehovah</foreign> there was always substituted the
Keri (= <q>read</q>&mdash;imperative) <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Adonai</foreign>, in order to avoid pronunciation of the great
Name, it seems the more remarkable that the Greek equivalent of <q>Jehovah</q> should
have been so constantly used of Christ. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <emph>Rom. 10:9&mdash;<q>confess ... Jesus as Lord</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 12:3&mdash;<q>no
man can say, Jesus is Lord, but in the Holy Spirit.</q></emph> We must remember also the indignation
of the Jews at Christ's assertion of his equality and oneness with the Father. Compare
Goethe's, <q>Wer darf ihn nennen?</q> with Carlyle's, <q>the awful Unnameable of this
Universe.</q> The Jews, it has been said, have always vibrated between monotheism and
moneytheism. Yet James, the strongest of Hebrews, in his Epistle uses the word 'Lord'
freely and alternately of God the Father and of Christ the Son. This would have been
impossible if James had not believed in the community of essence between the Son
and the Father.
</p>

<p>
It is interesting to note that 1 Maccabees does not once use the word Θεός or κύριος,
or any other direct designation of God unless it be οὐρανός (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph><q>swear ... by the heaven</q>&mdash;Mat.
5:34</emph>). So the book of Esther contains no mention of the name of God, though
the apocryphal additions to Esther, which are found only in Greek, contain the name
of God in the first verse, and mention it in all eight times. See Bissell, Apocrypha, in
Lange's Commentary; Liddon, Our Lord's Divinity, 93; Max Müller on Semitic Monotheism,
in Chips from a German Workshop, 1:337.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) He possesses the attributes of God.
</p>

<p>
Among these are life, self-existence, immutability, truth, love, holiness,
eternity, omnipresence, omniscience, omnipotence. All these attributes are
ascribed to Christ in connections which show that the terms are used in no
secondary sense, nor in any sense predicable of a creature.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Life</hi>: <emph>John 1:4&mdash;<q>In him was life</q></emph>; <emph>14:6&mdash;<q>I am ... the life.</q></emph> <hi rend='italic'>Self-existence</hi>: <emph>John 5:26&mdash;<q>have
life in himself</q></emph>; <emph>Heb. 7:16&mdash;<q>power of an endless life.</q></emph> <hi rend='italic'>Immutability</hi>: <emph>Heb. 13:8&mdash;<q>Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday and to-day, yea and forever.</q></emph> <hi rend='italic'>Truth</hi>: <emph>John 14:6&mdash;<q>I am ... the truth</q></emph>; <emph>Rev. 3:7&mdash;<q>he that is
true.</q></emph> <hi rend='italic'>Love</hi>: <emph>1 John 3:16&mdash;<q>Hereby know we love</q></emph> (τὴν ἀγάπην = the personal Love, as the personal
Truth) <q><emph>because he laid down his life for us</emph>.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Holiness</hi>: <emph>Luke 1:35&mdash;<q>that which is to be born shall
be called holy, the Son of God</q></emph>; <emph>John 6:69&mdash;<q>thou art the Holy One of God</q></emph>; <emph>Heb. 7:26&mdash;<q>holy, guileless, undefiled,
separated from sinners.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eternity</hi>: <emph>John 1:1&mdash;<q>In the beginning was the Word.</q></emph> Godet says ἐν ἀρχῇ = not <q>in eternity,</q>
but <q>in the beginning of the creation</q>; the eternity of the Word being an inference
from the ἦν&mdash;the Word <emph>was</emph>, when the world was <emph>created</emph>: <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Gen. 1:1&mdash;<q>In the beginning God
created.</q></emph> But Meyer says, ἐν ἀρχῇ here rises above the historical conception of <q><emph>in the
beginning</emph></q> in Genesis (which includes the beginning of time itself) to the absolute conception
of anteriority to time; the creation is something subsequent. He finds a parallel
in <emph>Prov. 8:23&mdash;ἐν ἀρχῇ πρὸ τοῦ τὴν γῆν ποιῆσαι</emph>. The interpretation <q>in the beginning of
the gospel</q> is entirely unexegetical; so Meyer. So <emph>John 17:5&mdash;<q>glory which I had with thee
before the world was</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 1:4&mdash;<q>chose us in him before the foundation of the world.</q></emph> Dorner also says
that ἐν ἀρχῇ in <emph>John 1:1</emph> is not <q>the beginning of the world,</q> but designates the point
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
back of which it is impossible to go, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, eternity; the world is first spoken of in <emph>verse 3.
John 8:58&mdash;<q>Before Abraham was born, I am</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>1:15</emph>; <emph>Col. 1:17&mdash;<q>he is before all things</q></emph>; <emph>Heb. 1:11</emph>&mdash;the
heavens <q><emph>shall perish; but thou continuest</emph></q>; <emph>Rev. 21:6&mdash;<q>I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Omnipresence</hi>: <emph>Mat. 28:20&mdash;<q>I am with you always</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 1:23&mdash;<q>the fulness of him that filleth all in
all.</q></emph> <hi rend='italic'>Omniscience</hi>: <emph>Mat. 9:4&mdash;<q>Jesus knowing their thoughts</q></emph>; <emph>John 2:24, 25&mdash;<q>knew all men ... knew
what was in man</q></emph>; <emph>16:30&mdash;<q>knowest all things</q></emph>; <emph>Acts 1:24&mdash;<q>Thou, Lord, who knowest the hearts of all men</q></emph>&mdash;a
prayer offered before the day of Pentecost and showing the attitude of the disciples
toward their Master; <emph>1 Cor. 4:5&mdash;<q>until the Lord come, who will both bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the hearts</q></emph>; <emph>Col. 2:3&mdash;<q>in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge hidden.</q></emph> <hi rend='italic'>Omnipotence</hi>: <emph>Mat. 27:18&mdash;<q>All authority hath been given unto me in heaven and on
earth</q></emph>; <emph>Rev. 1:8&mdash;<q>the Lord God, which is and which was and which is to come, the Almighty.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
Beyschlag, N. T. Theology, 1:249-260, holds that Jesus' preëxistence is simply the
concrete form given to an ideal conception. Jesus traces himself back, as everything
else holy and divine was traced back in the conceptions of his time, to a heavenly
original in which it preëxisted before its earthly appearance; <hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>: the tabernacle, in
<emph>Heb. 8:5</emph>; Jerusalem, in <emph>Gal. 4:25</emph> and <emph>Rev. 21:10</emph>; the kingdom of God in <emph>Mat. 13:24</emph>; much
more the Messiah, in <emph>John 6:62&mdash;<q>ascending where he was before</q></emph>; <emph>8:58&mdash;<q>Before Abraham was born, I
am</q></emph>; <emph>17:4, 5&mdash;<q>glory which I had with thee before the world was</q></emph> <emph>17:24&mdash;<q>thou lovedst me before the foundation
of the world.</q></emph> This view that Jesus existed before creation only ideally in the divine
mind, means simply that God foreknew him and his coming. The view is refuted by
the multiplied intimations of a personal, in distinction from an ideal, preëxistence.
</p>

<p>
Lowrie, Doctrine of St. John, 115&mdash;<q>The words <emph><q>In the beginning</q> (John 1:1)</emph> suggest that
the author is about to write a second book of Genesis, an account of a new creation.</q>
As creation presupposes a Creator, the preëxistence of the personal Word is assigned
as the explanation of the being of the universe. The ἦν indicates absolute existence,
which is a loftier idea than that of mere preëxistence, although it includes this. While
John the Baptist and Abraham are said to have arisen, appeared, come into being, it
is said that the Logos <emph>was</emph>, and that the Logos was <emph>God</emph>. This implies coëternity with
the Father. But, if the view we are combating were correct, John the Baptist and
Abraham preëxisted, equally with Christ. This is certainly not the meaning of Jesus
in <emph>John 8:58&mdash;<q>Before Abraham was born, I am</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Col. 1:17&mdash;<q>he is before all things</q></emph>&mdash;<q>αὐτός emphasizes
the personality, while ἔστιν declares that the preëxistence is absolute existence</q>
(Lightfoot); <emph>John 1:15&mdash;<q>He that cometh after me is become before me: for he was before me</q></emph> = not that
Jesus was <emph>born</emph> earlier than John the Baptist, for he was born six months later, but
that he <emph>existed</emph> earlier. He stands before John in rank, because he existed long
before John in time; <emph>6:62&mdash;<q>the Son of man ascending where he was before</q></emph>; <emph>16:28&mdash;<q>I came out from
the Father, and am come into the world.</q></emph> So <emph>Is. 9:6, 7</emph>, calls Christ <q><emph>Everlasting Father</emph></q> = eternity is
an attribute of the Messiah. T. W. Chambers, in Jour. Soc. Bib. Exegesis, 1881:169-171&mdash;<q>Christ
is the Everlasting One, <emph><q>whose goings forth have been from of old, even from the days of eternity</q>
(Micah 5:2). <q>Of the increase of his government ... there shall be no end,</q></emph> just because of his
existence there has been no beginning.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(d) The works of God are ascribed to him.
</p>

<p>
We do not here speak of miracles, which may be wrought by communicated
power, but of such works as the creation of the world, the upholding
of all things, the final raising of the dead, and the judging of all men.
Power to perform these works cannot be delegated, for they are characteristic
of omnipotence.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Creation</hi>: <emph>John 1:3&mdash;<q>All things were made through him</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 8:6&mdash;<q>one lord, Jesus Christ, through
whom are all things</q></emph>; <emph>Col. 1:16&mdash;<q>all things have been created through him, and unto him</q></emph>; <emph>Heb, 1:10&mdash;<q>Thou,
Lord, in the beginning didst lay the foundation of the earth, And the heavens are the works of thy hands</q></emph>; <emph>3:3, 4&mdash;<q>he
that built all things is God</q></emph> = Christ, the builder of the house of Israel, is the God who
made all things; <emph>Rev. 3:14&mdash;<q>the beginning of the creation of God</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Plato: <q>Mind is the ἀρχή
of motion</q>). <hi rend='italic'>Upholding</hi>: <emph>Col. 1:17&mdash;<q>in him all things consist</q></emph> (marg. <q><emph>hold together</emph></q>); <emph>Heb. 1:3&mdash;<q>upholding
all things by the word of his power.</q></emph> <hi rend='italic'>Raising the dead and judging the world</hi>: <emph>John 5:27-29&mdash;<q>authority
to execute judgment ... all that are in the tombs shall hear his voice, and shall come forth</q></emph>;
<emph>Mat. 25:31, 32&mdash;<q>sit on the throne of his glory; and before him shall be gathered all the nations.</q></emph> If our argument
were addressed wholly to believers, we might also urge Christ's work in the world
as Revealer of God and Redeemer from sin, as a proof of his deity. [On the works of
Christ, see Liddon, Our Lord's Divinity, 153; <hi rend='italic'>per contra</hi>, see Examination of Liddon's
Bampton Lectures, 72.]
</p>

<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>

<p>
Statements of Christ's creative and of his upholding activity are combined in <emph>John
1:3, 4&mdash;Πάντα δι᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο, καὶ χωρὶς αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο οὐδὲ ἕν. ὅ γέγονεν ἐν αὐτῷ ζωὴ ἦν&mdash;<q>All
things were made through him; and without him was not anything made. That which hath been made was life in him</q></emph>
(marg.). Westcott: <q>It would be difficult to find a more complete consent of ancient
authorities in favor of any reading than that which supports this punctuation.</q>
Westcott therefore adopts it. The passage shows that the universe 1. exists within
the bounds of Christ's being; 2. is not dead, but living; 3. derives its life from him;
see Inge, Christian Mysticism, 46. Creation requires the divine presence, as well as
the divine agency. God creates through Christ. All things were made, not ὐπὸ αὐτοῦ&mdash;<q>by
him,</q> but δι᾽ αὐτοῦ&mdash;<emph><q>through him.</q></emph> Christian believers <q>Behind creation's throbbing
screen Catch movements of the great Unseen.</q>
</p>

<p>
Van Oosterzee, Christian Dogmatics, iv, lvi&mdash;<q>That which many a philosopher
dimly conjectured, namely, that God did not produce the world in an absolute, immediate
manner, but in some way or other, mediately, here presents itself to us with the
lustre of revelation, and exalts so much the more the claim of the Son of God to our
deep and reverential homage.</q> Would that such scientific men as Tyndall and Huxley
might see Christ in nature, and, doing his will, might learn of the doctrine and be
led to the Father! The humblest Christian who sees Christ's hand in the physical universe
and in human history knows more of the secret of the universe than all the mere
scientists put together.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Col 1:17&mdash;<q>In him all things consist,</q></emph> or <emph><q>hold together,</q></emph> means nothing less than that Christ is the
principle of cohesion in the universe, making it a cosmos instead of a chaos. Tyndall
said that the attraction of the sun upon the earth was as inconceivable as if a horse
should draw a cart without traces. Sir Isaac Newton: <q>Gravitation must be caused by
an agent acting constantly according to certain laws.</q> Lightfoot: <q>Gravitation is an
expression of the mind of Christ.</q> Evolution also is a method of his operation. The
laws of nature are the habits of Christ, and nature itself is but his steady and constant
will. He binds together man and nature in one organic whole, so that we can speak
of a <q>universe.</q> Without him there would be no intellectual bond, no uniformity
of law, no unity of truth. He is the principle of induction, that enables us to argue
from one thing to another. The medium of interaction between things is also the
medium of intercommunication between minds. It is fitting that he who draws and
holds together the physical and intellectual, should also draw and hold together the
moral universe, drawing all men to himself (<emph>John 12:32</emph>) and so to God, and reconciling
all things in heaven and earth (<emph>Col. 1:20</emph>). In Christ <q>the law appears, Drawn out in
living characters,</q> because he is the ground and source of all law, both in nature and
in humanity. See A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 6-12.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) He receives honor and worship due only to God.
</p>

<p>
In addition to the address of Thomas, in John 20:28, which we have
already cited among the proofs that Jesus is expressly called God, and in
which divine honor is paid to him, we may refer to the prayer and worship
offered by the apostolic and post-apostolic church.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>John 5:23&mdash;<q>that all may honor the Son, even as they honor the Father</q></emph>; <emph>14:14&mdash;<q rend='pre'>If ye shall ask me</q></emph> [so אB
and Tisch. 8th ed.] <emph><q rend='post'>anything in my name, that will I do</q></emph>; <emph>Acts 7:59&mdash;<q>Stephen, calling upon the Lord, and saying,
Lord Jesus, receive my spirit</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Luke 23:46</emph>&mdash;Jesus' words: <emph><q>Father, into thy hands I commend my
spirit</q></emph>); <emph>Rom. 10:9&mdash;<q>confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord</q></emph>; <emph>13&mdash;<q>whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord
shall be saved</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Gen. 4:26&mdash;<q>Then began men to call upon the name of Jehovah</q></emph>); <emph>1 Cor. 11:24, 25&mdash;<q>this do
in remembrance of me</q></emph> = worship of Christ; <emph>Heb. 1:6&mdash;<q>let all the angels of God worship him</q></emph>; <emph>Phil. 2:10,
11&mdash;<q>in the name of Jesus every knee should bow ... every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord</q></emph>; <emph>Rev.
5:12-14&mdash;<q>Worthy is the Lamb that hath been slain to receive the power....</q></emph>; <emph>2 Pet. 3:18&mdash;<q>Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. To him be the glory</q></emph>; <emph>2 Tim. 4:18 and Heb. 13:21&mdash;<q>to whom be the glory for ever and ever</q></emph>&mdash;these
ascriptions of eternal glory to Christ imply his deity. See also <emph>1 Pet. 3:15&mdash;<q>Sanctify
in your hearts Christ as Lord,</q></emph> and <emph>Eph. 5:21&mdash;<q>subjecting yourselves one to another in the fear of Christ.</q></emph>
Here is enjoined an attitude of mind towards Christ which would be idolatrous if
Christ were not God. See Liddon, Our Lord's Divinity, 266, 366.
</p>

<p>
Foster, Christian Life and Theology, 154&mdash;<q>In the eucharistic liturgy of the <q>Teaching</q>
we read: <q>Hosanna to the God of David</q>; Ignatius styles him repeatedly God
<q>begotten and unbegotten, come in the flesh</q>; speaking once of <q>the blood of God</q>, in
evident allusion to <emph>Acts 20:28</emph>; the epistle to Diognetus takes up the Pauline words and
calls him the <q>architect and world-builder by whom [God] created the heavens</q>, and
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
names him God (chap. vii); Hermas speaks of him as <q>the holy preëxistent Spirit, that
created every creature</q>, which style of expression is followed by Justin, who calls him
God, as also all the later great writers. In the second epistle of Clement (130-160, Harnack),
we read: <q>Brethren, it is fitting that you should think of Jesus Christ as of God&mdash;as
the Judge of the living and the dead.</q> And Ignatius describes him as <q>begotten
and unbegotten, passible and impassible, ... who was before the eternities with the
Father.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
These testimonies only give evidence that the Church Fathers saw in Scripture
divine honor ascribed to Christ. They were but the precursors of a host of later interpreters.
In a lull of the awful massacre of Armenian Christians at Sassouan, one of
the Kurdish savages was heard to ask: <q>Who was that <q>Lord Jesus</q> that they were
calling to?</q> In their death agonies, the Christians, like Stephen of old, called upon
the name of the Lord. Robert Browning quoted, in a letter to a lady in her last illness,
the words of Charles Lamb, when <q>in a gay fancy with some friends as to how he and
they would feel if the greatest of the dead were to appear suddenly in flesh and blood
once more&mdash;on the first suggestion, <q>And if Christ entered this room?</q> changed his
tone at once and stuttered out as his manner was when moved: <q>You see&mdash;if Shakespere
entered, we should all rise; if He appeared, we must kneel.</q></q> On prayer to
Jesus, see Liddon, Bampton Lectures, note F; Bernard, in Hastings' Bib. Dict., 4:44;
Zahn, Skizzen aus dem Leben der alten Kirche, 9, 288.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) His name is associated with that of God upon a footing of equality.
</p>

<p>
We do not here allude to 1 John 5:7 (the three heavenly witnesses), for
the latter part of this verse is unquestionably spurious; but to the formula
of baptism, to the apostolic benedictions, and to those passages in which
eternal life is said to be dependent equally upon Christ and upon God, or
in which spiritual gifts are attributed to Christ equally with the Father.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The formula of baptism</hi>: <emph>Mat. 28:19&mdash;<q>baptising them into the name of the father and of the Son and of
the Holy Spirit</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Acts 2:38&mdash;<q>be baptised every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 6:3&mdash;<q>baptized
into Christ Jesus.</q></emph> <q>In the common baptismal formula the Son and the Spirit are coördinated
with the Father, and εἰς ὄνομα has religious significance.</q> It would be both
absurd and profane to speak of baptizing into the name of the Father and of Moses.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The apostolic benedictions</hi>: <emph>1 Cor. 1:3&mdash;<q>Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ</q></emph>; <emph>2 Cor. 13:14&mdash;<q>The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy
Spirit, be with you all.</q></emph> <q>In the benedictions grace is something divine, and Christ has
power to impart it. But why do we find <emph><q>God,</q></emph> instead of simply <emph><q>the Father,</q></emph> as in the baptismal
formula? Because it is only the Father who does not become man or have a
historical existence. Elsewhere he is specially called <q><emph>God the Father</emph>,</q> to distinguish him
from God the Son and God the Holy Spirit (<emph>Gal. 1:3</emph>; <emph>Eph. 3:14</emph>; <emph>6:23</emph>).</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Other passages</hi>: <emph>John 5:23&mdash;<q>that all may honor the Son, even as they honor the Father</q></emph>; <emph>John 14:1&mdash;<q>believe
in God, believe also in me</q></emph>&mdash;double imperative (so Westcott, Bible Com., <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>);
<emph>17:3&mdash;<q>this is life eternal, that they should know thee the only true God, and him whom thou didst send, even Jesus
Christ</q></emph>; <emph>Mat. 11:27&mdash;<q>no one knoweth the Son, save the Father; neither doth any know the Father, save the Son, and
he to whomsoever the Son willeth to reveal him</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 12:4-6&mdash;<q rend='pre'>the same Spirit ... the same Lord</q></emph> [Christ] ...
<emph><q rend='post'>the same God</q></emph> [the Father] bestow spiritual gifts, <hi rend='italic'>e. g.</hi>, faith: <emph>Rom. 10:17&mdash;<q>belief cometh of hearing,
and hearing by the word of Christ</q></emph>; peace: <emph>Col. 3:15&mdash;<q>let the peace of Christ rule in your hearts.</q></emph> <emph>2 Thess.
2:16, 17&mdash;<q>now our lord Jesus Christ himself, and God our Father ... comfort your hearts</q></emph>&mdash;two names
with a verb in the singular intimate the oneness of the Father and the Son (Lillie). <emph>Eph.
5:5&mdash;<q>kingdom of Christ and God</q></emph>; <emph>Col. 3:1&mdash;<q>Christ ... seated on the right hand of God</q></emph> = participation
in the sovereignty of the universe,&mdash;the Eastern divan held not only the monarch
but his son; <emph>Rev. 20:6&mdash;<q>priests of God and of Christ</q></emph>; <emph>22:3&mdash;<q>the throne of God and of the Lamb</q></emph>; <emph>16&mdash;<q>the
root and the offspring of David</q></emph> = both the Lord of David and his son. Hackett: <q>As the
dying Savior said to the Father, <emph><q>Into thy hands I commend my spirit</q> (Luke 23:46)</emph>, so the dying
Stephen said to the Savior, <emph><q>receive my spirit</q> (Acts 7:59)</emph>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) Equality with God is expressly claimed.
</p>

<p>
Here we may refer to Jesus' testimony to himself, already treated of
among the proofs of the supernatural character of the Scripture teaching
(see pages <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>). Equality with God is not only claimed for himself by
Jesus, but it is claimed for him by his apostles.
</p>

<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>John 5:18&mdash;<q>called God his own Father, making himself equal with God</q></emph>; <emph>Phil. 2:6&mdash;<q>who, existing in the form
of God, counted not the being on an equality with God a thing to be grasped</q></emph>&mdash;counted not his equality
with God a thing to be forcibly retained. Christ made and left upon his contemporaries
the impression that he claimed to be God. The New Testament has left, upon the
great mass of those who have read it, the impression that Jesus Christ claims to be God.
If he is not God, he is a deceiver or is self-deceived, and, in either case, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Christus, si non
Deus, non bonus</foreign>. See Nicoll, Life of Jesus Christ, 187.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>h</hi>) Further proof of Christ's deity may be found in the application to
him of the phrases: <q>Son of God,</q> <q>Image of God</q>; in the declarations
of his oneness with God; in the attribution to him of the fulness of the
Godhead.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Mat. 26:63, 64&mdash;<q>I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou art the Christ, the Son of God.
Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said</q></emph>&mdash;it is for this testimony that Christ dies. <emph>Col. 1:15&mdash;<q>the
image of the invisible God</q></emph>; <emph>Heb. 1:3&mdash;<q rend='pre'>the effulgence of his</q></emph> [the Father's] <emph><q rend='post'>glory, and the very image of
his substance</q></emph>; <emph>John 10:30&mdash;<q>I and the Father are one</q></emph>; <emph>14:9&mdash;<q>he that hath seen me hath seen the Father</q></emph>; <emph>17:11,
22&mdash;<q>that they may be one, even as we are</q></emph>&mdash;ἕ, not εἰς; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>unum</foreign>, not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>unus</foreign>; one substance, not
one person. <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unum</foreign> is antidote to the Arian, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sumus</foreign> to the Sabellian heresy.</q> <emph>Col. 2:9&mdash;<q>in
him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>1:19&mdash;<q>for it was the pleasure of the Father
that in him should all the fulness dwell;</q></emph> or (marg.) <q><emph>for the whole fulness of God was pleased to dwell in him</emph>.</q>
<emph>John 16:15&mdash;<q>all things whatsoever the Father hath are mine</q></emph>; <emph>17:10&mdash;<q>all things that are mine are thine, and
thine are mine.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
Meyer on <emph>John 10:30&mdash;<q>I and the Father are one</q></emph>&mdash;<q>Here the Arian understanding of a mere
ethical harmony as taught in the words <q><emph>are one</emph></q> is unsatisfactory, because irrelevant to
the exercise of power. Oneness of essence, though not contained in the words themselves,
is, by the necessities of the argument, presupposed in them.</q> Dalman, The
Words of Jesus: <q>Nowhere do we find that Jesus called himself the Son of God in such
a sense as to suggest a merely religious and ethical relation to God&mdash;a relation which
others also possessed and which they were capable of attaining or were destined to
acquire.</q> We may add that while in the lower sense there are many <q><emph>sons of God</emph>,</q> there
is but one <q><emph>only begotten Son</emph>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>i</hi>) These proofs of Christ's deity from the New Testament are corroborated
by Christian experience.
</p>

<p>
Christian experience recognizes Christ as an absolutely perfect Savior,
perfectly revealing the Godhead and worthy of unlimited worship and
adoration; that is, it practically recognizes him as Deity. But Christian
experience also recognizes that through Christ it has introduction and
reconciliation to God as one distinct from Jesus Christ, as one who was
alienated from the soul by its sin, but who is now reconciled through
Jesus's death. In other words, while recognizing Jesus as God, we are
also compelled to recognize a distinction between the Father and the Son
through whom we come to the Father.
</p>

<p>
Although this experience cannot be regarded as an independent witness
to Jesus' claims, since it only tests the truth already made known in the
Bible, still the irresistible impulse of every person whom Christ has saved
to lift his Redeemer to the highest place, and bow before him in the lowliest
worship, is strong evidence that only that interpretation of Scripture can
be true which recognizes Christ's absolute Godhead. It is the church's
consciousness of her Lord's divinity, indeed, and not mere speculation
upon the relations of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that has compelled the
formulation of the Scripture doctrine of the Trinity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In the letter of Pliny to Trajan, it is said of the early Christians <q>quod essent soliti
carmen Christo quasi Deo dicere invicem.</q> The prayers and hymns of the church
show what the church has believed Scripture to teach. Dwight Moody is said to have
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
received his first conviction of the truth of the gospel from hearing the concluding
words of a prayer, <q>For Christ's sake, Amen,</q> when awakened from physical slumber
in Dr. Kirk's church, Boston. These words, wherever uttered, imply man's dependence
and Christ's deity. See New Englander, 1878:432. In <emph>Eph. 4:32</emph>, the Revised Version substitutes
<q><emph>in Christ</emph></q> for <q>for Christ's sake.</q> The exact phrase <q>for Christ's sake</q> is not
found in the N. T. in connection with prayer, although the O. T. phrase <emph><q>for my name's
sake</q> (Ps. 25:11)</emph> passes into the N. T. phrase <emph><q>in the name of Jesus</q> (Phil. 2:10)</emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Ps. 72:15&mdash;<q>men
shall pray for him continually</q></emph> = the words of the hymn: <q>For him shall endless prayer
be made, And endless blessings crown his head.</q> All this is proof that the idea of
prayer for Christ's sake is in Scripture, though the phrase is absent.
</p>

<p>
A caricature scratched on the wall of the Palatine palace in Rome, and dating back
to the third century, represents a human figure with an ass's head, hanging upon a
cross, while a man stands before it in the attitude of worship. Under the effigy is this
ill-spelled inscription: <q>Alexamenos adores his God.</q>
</p>

<p>
This appeal to the testimony of Christian consciousness was first made by Schleiermacher.
William E. Gladstone: <q>All I write, and all I think, and all I hope, is based
upon the divinity of our Lord, the one central hope of our poor, wayward race.</q> E. G.
Robinson: <q>When you preach salvation by faith in Christ, you preach the Trinity.</q>
W. G. T. Shedd: <q>The construction of the doctrine of the Trinity started, not from the
consideration of the three persons, but from belief in the deity of one of them.</q> On
the worship of Christ in the authorized services of the Anglican church, see Stanley,
Church and State, 333-335; Liddon, Divinity of our Lord, 514.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In contemplating passages apparently inconsistent with those now cited,
in that they impute to Christ weakness and ignorance, limitation and subjection,
we are to remember, first, that our Lord was truly man, as well as
truly God, and that this ignorance and weakness may be predicated of him
as the God-man in whom deity and humanity are united; secondly, that
the divine nature itself was in some way limited and humbled during our
Savior's earthly life, and that these passages may describe him as he was
in his estate of humiliation, rather than in his original and present glory;
and, thirdly, that there is an order of office and operation which is consistent
with essential oneness and equality, but which permits the Father to be
spoken of as first and the Son as second. These statements will be further
elucidated in the treatment of the present doctrine and in subsequent
examination of the doctrine of the Person of Christ.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
There are certain things of which Christ was ignorant: <emph>Mark 13:32&mdash;<q>of that day or that
hour knoweth no one, not even the angels in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.</q></emph> He was subject to
physical fatigue: <emph>John 4:6&mdash;<q>Jesus therefore, being wearied with his journey, sat thus by the well.</q></emph> There
was a limitation connected with Christ's taking of human flesh: <emph>Phil. 2:7&mdash;<q>emptied himself,
taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men</q></emph>; <emph>John 14:28&mdash;<q>the Father is greater than I.</q></emph>
There is a subjection, as respects order of office and operation, which is yet consistent
with equality of essence and oneness with God; <emph>1 Cor. 15:28&mdash;<q>then shall the Son also himself
be subjected to him that did subject all things unto him, that God may be all in all.</q></emph> This must be interpreted
consistently with <emph>John 17:5&mdash;<q>glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before
the world was,</q></emph> and with <emph>Phil. 2:6</emph>, where this glory is described as being <q><emph>the form of God</emph></q> and
<q><emph>equality with God</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Even in his humiliation, Christ was the Essential Truth, and ignorance in him never
involved error or false teaching. Ignorance on his part might make his teaching at
times incomplete,&mdash;it never in the smallest particular made his teaching false. Yet
here we must distinguish between what he <emph>intended</emph> to teach and what was merely
<emph>incidental</emph> to his teaching. When he said: Moses <emph><q>wrote of me</q> (John 5:46)</emph> and <emph><q>David in the
Spirit called him Lord</q> (Mat. 22:43)</emph>, if his purpose was to teach the authorship of the Pentateuch
and of the 110th Psalm, we should regard his words as absolutely authoritative.
But it is possible that he intended only to <emph>locate</emph> the passages referred to, and if so, his
words cannot be used to exclude critical conclusions as to their authorship. Adamson,
The Mind in Christ, 136&mdash;<q>If he spoke of Moses or David, it was only to identify the
passage. The authority of the earlier dispensation did not rest upon its record being due
to Moses, nor did the appropriateness of the Psalm lie in its being uttered by David.
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
There is no evidence that the question of authorship ever came before him.</q> Adamson
rather more precariously suggests that <q>there may have been a lapse of memory
in Jesus' mention of <emph><q>Zachariah, son of Barachiah</q> (Mat. 23:35)</emph>, since this was a matter of no
spiritual import.</q>
</p>

<p>
For assertions of Jesus' knowledge, see <emph>John 2:24, 25&mdash;<q>he knew all men ... he needed not
that any one should bear witness concerning man; for he himself knew what was in man</q></emph>; <emph>6:64&mdash;<q>Jesus knew from
the beginning who they were that believed not, and who it was that should betray him</q></emph>; <emph>12:33&mdash;<q>this he said, signifying
by what manner of death he should die</q></emph>; <emph>21:19&mdash;<q rend='pre'>Now this he spake, signifying by what manner of death he</q></emph>
[Peter] <emph><q rend='post'>should glorify God</q></emph>; <emph>13:1&mdash;<q>knowing that his hour was come that he should depart</q></emph>; <emph>Mat. 25:31&mdash;<q>when
the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne of his
glory</q></emph> = he knew that he was to act as final judge of the human race. Other instances
are mentioned by Adamson, The Mind in Christ, 24-49: 1. Jesus' knowledge of Peter
(<emph>John 1:42</emph>); 2. his finding Philip (<emph>1:43</emph>); 3. his recognition of Nathanael (<emph>1:47-50</emph>); 4. of
the woman of Samaria (<emph>4:17-19, 39</emph>); 5. miraculous draughts of fishes (<emph>Luke 5:6-9</emph>; <emph>John
21:6</emph>); 6. death of Lazarus (<emph>John 11:14</emph>); 7. the ass's colt (<emph>Mat. 21:2</emph>); 8. of the upper room
(<emph>Mark 14:15</emph>); 9. of Peter's denial (<emph>Mat. 26:34</emph>); 10. of the manner of his own death (<emph>John
12:33</emph>; <emph>18:32</emph>); 11. of the manner of Peter's death (<emph>John 21:19</emph>); 12. of the fall of Jerusalem
(<emph>Mat. 24:2</emph>).
</p>

<p>
On the other hand there are assertions and implications of Jesus' ignorance: he did
not know the day of the end (<emph>Mark 13:32</emph>), though even here he intimates his superiority
to angels; <emph>5:30-34&mdash;<q>Who touched my garments?</q></emph> though even here power had gone forth
from him to heal; <emph>John 11:34&mdash;<q>Where have ye laid him?</q></emph> though here he is about to raise
Lazarus from the dead; <emph>Mark 11:13&mdash;<q>seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came, if haply he might
find anything thereon</q></emph> = he did not know that it had no fruit, yet he had power to curse it.
With these evidences of the limitations of Jesus' knowledge, we must assent to the
judgment of Bacon, Genesis of Genesis, 33&mdash;<q>We must decline to stake the authority
of Jesus on a question of literary criticism</q>; and of Gore, Incarnation, 195&mdash;<q>That
the use by our Lord of such a phrase as <q><emph>Moses wrote of me</emph></q> binds us to the Mosaic authorship
of the Pentateuch as a whole, I do not think we need to yield.</q> See our section on
The Person of Christ; also Rush Rhees, Life of Jesus, 243, 244. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Swayne,
Our Lord's Knowledge as Man; and Crooker, The New Bible, who very unwisely claims
that belief in a Kenosis involves the surrender of Christ's authority and atonement.
</p>

<p>
It is inconceivable that any mere <emph>creature</emph> should say, <q>God is greater than I am,</q>
or should be spoken of as ultimately and in a mysterious way becoming <q>subject to
God.</q> In his state of humiliation Christ was subject to the Spirit (<emph>Acts 1:2&mdash;<q>after that he
had given commandment through the Holy Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>10:38&mdash;<q>God anointed him with the Holy Spirit ... for God
was with him</q></emph>; <emph>Heb.9:14&mdash;<q>through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish unto God</q></emph>), but in his
state of exaltation Christ is Lord of the Spirit (κυρίου πνεύματος&mdash;<emph>2 Cor. 3:18</emph>&mdash;Meyer),
giving the Spirit and working through the Spirit. <emph>Heb. 2:7</emph>, marg.&mdash;<emph><q>Thou madest him for a little
while lower than the angels.</q></emph> On the whole subject, see Shedd, Hist. Doctrine, 262, 351; Thomasius,
Christi Person und Werk, 1:61-64; Liddon, Our Lord's Divinity, 127, 207, 458;
<hi rend='italic'>per contra</hi>, see Examination of Liddon, 252, 294; Professors of Andover Seminary,
Divinity of Christ.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>C. The Holy Spirit is recognized as God.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) He is spoken of as God; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the attributes of God are ascribed to
him, such as life, truth, love, holiness, eternity, omnipresence, omniscience,
omnipotence; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) he does the works of God, such as creation, regeneration,
resurrection; (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) he receives honor due only to God; (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) he is associated
with God on a footing of equality, both in the formula of baptism
and in the apostolic benedictions.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Spoken of as God.</hi> <emph>Acts 5:3, 4&mdash;<q>lie to the Holy Spirit ... not lied unto men, but unto God</q></emph>;
<emph>1 Cor. 3:16&mdash;<q>ye are a temple of God ... the Spirit of God dwelleth in you</q></emph>; <emph>6:19&mdash;<q>your body is a temple of the
Holy Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>12:4-6 <q>same Spirit ... same Lord ... same God, who worketh all things in all</q></emph>&mdash;<q>The
divine Trinity is here indicated in an ascending climax, in such a way that we pass
from the Spirit who bestows the gifts to the Lord [Christ] who is served by means of
them, and finally to God, who as the absolute first cause and possessor of all Christian
powers works the entire sum of all charismatic gifts in all who are gifted</q> (Meyer in
<hi rend='italic'>loco</hi>).
</p>

<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Attributes of God.</hi> Life: <emph>Rom. 8:2&mdash;<q>Spirit of life.</q></emph> Truth: <emph>John 16:13 <q>Spirit of truth.</q></emph> Love:
<emph>Rom. 15:30&mdash;<q>love of the Spirit.</q></emph> Holiness: <emph>Eph. 4:30&mdash;<q>the Holy Spirit of God.</q></emph> Eternity: <emph>Heb. 9:14&mdash;<q>the
eternal Spirit.</q></emph> Omnipresence: <emph>Ps. 139:7&mdash;<q>Whither shall I go from thy Spirit?</q></emph> Omniscience:
<emph>1 Cor. 12:11&mdash;<q rend='pre'>all these</q></emph> [including gifts of healings and miracles] <emph><q rend='post'>worketh the one and the same
Spirit, dividing to each one severally even as he will.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Works of God.</hi> Creation: <emph>Gen. 1:2</emph>, marg.&mdash;<emph><q>Spirit of God was brooding upon the face of the waters.</q></emph>
Casting out of demons: <emph>Mat. 12:28&mdash;<q>But if I by the Spirit of God cast out demons.</q></emph> Conviction of
sin: <emph>John 16:8&mdash;<q>convict the world in respect of sin.</q></emph> Regeneration: <emph>John 3:8&mdash;<q>born of the Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>Tit.
3:5&mdash;<q>renewing of the Holy Spirit.</q></emph> Resurrection: <emph>Rom. 8:11&mdash;<q>give life also to your mortal bodies through
his Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 15:45&mdash;<q>The last Adam became a life-giving spirit.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Honor due to God.</hi> <emph>1 Cor. 3:16&mdash;<q>ye are a temple of God ... the Spirit of God dwelleth in you</q></emph>&mdash;he
who inhabits the temple is the object of worship there. See also the next item.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>Associated with God.</hi> Formula of baptism: <emph>Mat. 28:19&mdash;<q>baptizing them into the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit.</q></emph> If the baptismal formula is worship, then we have here
worship paid to the Spirit. Apostolic benedictions: <emph>2 Cor. 13:14&mdash;<q>The grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit be with you all.</q></emph> If the apostolic benedictions
are prayers, then we have here a prayer to the Spirit. <emph>1 Pet. 1:2&mdash;<q>foreknowledge of
God the Father ... sanctification of the Spirit ... sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
On <emph>Heb. 9:14</emph>, Kendrick, Com. <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>, interprets: <q>Offers himself by virtue of an
eternal spirit which dwells within him and imparts to his sacrifice a spiritual and an
eternal efficacy. The <q>spirit</q> here spoken of was not, then, the <q>Holy Spirit</q>; it was not
his purely divine nature; it was that blending of his divine nature with his human personality
which forms the mystery of his being, that <emph><q>spirit of holiness</q></emph> by virtue of which
he was declared <q><emph>the Son of God with power</emph>,</q> on account of his resurrection from the
dead.</q> Hovey adds a note to Kendrick's Commentary, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>, as follows: <q>This
adjective <q><emph>eternal</emph></q> naturally suggests that the word <q><emph>Spirit</emph></q> refers to the higher and
divine nature of Christ. His truly human nature, on its spiritual side, was indeed
eternal as to the future, but so also is the spirit of every man. The unique and superlative
value of Christ's self-sacrifice seems to have been due to the impulse of the
divine side of his nature.</q> The phrase <emph><q>eternal spirit</q></emph> would then mean his divinity. To
both these interpretations we prefer that which makes the passage refer to the Holy
Spirit, and we cite in support of this view <emph>Acts 1:2&mdash;<q>he had given commandment through the Holy
Spirit unto the apostles</q></emph>; <emph>10:38&mdash;<q>God anointed him with the Holy Spirit.</q></emph> On <emph>1 Cor. 2:10</emph>, Mason, Faith of
the Gospel, 63, remarks: <q>The Spirit of God finds nothing even in God which baffles
his scrutiny. His <emph><q>search</q></emph> is not a seeking for knowledge yet beyond him.... Nothing
but God could search the depths of God.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
As spirit is nothing less than the inmost principle of life, and the spirit
of man is man himself, so the spirit of God must be God (see 1 Cor. 2:11&mdash;Meyer).
Christian experience, moreover, expressed as it is in the
prayers and hymns of the church, furnishes an argument for the deity of
the Holy Spirit similar to that for the deity of Jesus Christ. When our
eyes are opened to see Christ as a Savior, we are compelled to recognize
the work in us of a divine Spirit who has taken of the things of Christ and
has shown them to us; and this divine Spirit we necessarily distinguish
both from the Father and from the Son. Christian experience, however,
is not an original and independent witness to the deity of the Holy Spirit:
it simply shows what the church has held to be the natural and unforced
interpretation of the Scriptures, and so confirms the Scripture argument
already adduced.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Holy Spirit is God himself personally present in the believer. E. G. Robinson:
<q>If <q>Spirit of God</q> no more implies deity than does <q>angel of God,</q> why is not the
Holy Spirit called simply the angel or messenger, of God?</q> Walker, The Spirit and
the Incarnation, 337&mdash;<q>The Holy Spirit is God in his innermost being or essence,
the principle of life of both the Father and the Son; that in which God, both as Father
and Son, does everything, and in which he comes to us and is in us increasingly
through his manifestations. Through the working and indwelling of this Holy Spirit,
God in his person of Son was fully incarnate in Christ.</q> Gould, Am. Com. on <emph>1 Cor. 2:11</emph>&mdash;<emph><q>For
who among men knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of the man, which is in him? even so the things of
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
God none knoweth, save the Spirit of God</q></emph>&mdash;<q>The analogy must not be pushed too far, as if the
Spirit of God and God were coëxtensive terms, as the corresponding terms are, substantially,
in man. The point of the analogy is evidently <emph>self-knowledge</emph>, and in both
cases the contrast is between the spirit within and anything outside.</q> Andrew Murray,
Spirit of Christ, 140&mdash;<q>We must not expect always to feel the power of the Spirit
when it works. Scripture links power and weakness in a wonderful way, not as succeeding
each other but as existing together. <emph><q>I was with you in weakness ... my preaching was in
power</q> (1 Cor. 2:3)</emph>; <emph><q>when I am weak then am I strong</q> (2 Cor. 12:10)</emph>. The power is the power of God
given to faith, and faith grows strong in the dark.... He who would command nature
must first and most absolutely obey her.... We want to get possession of the Power,
and use it. God wants the Power to get possession of us, and use us.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
This proof of the deity of the Holy Spirit is not invalidated by the limitations
of his work under the Old Testament dispensation. John 7:39&mdash;<q>for
the Holy Spirit was not yet</q>&mdash;means simply that the Holy Spirit
could not fulfill his peculiar office as Revealer of Christ until the atoning
work of Christ should be accomplished.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>John 7:39</emph> is to be interpreted in the light of other Scriptures which assert the agency
of the Holy Spirit under the old dispensation (<emph>Ps. 51:11&mdash;<q>take not thy holy Spirit from me</q></emph>)
and which describe his peculiar office under the new dispensation (<emph>John 16:14, 15&mdash;<q>he
shall take of mine, and shall declare it unto you</q></emph>). Limitation in the <emph>manner</emph> of the Spirit's work
in the O. T. involved a limitation in the <emph>extent</emph> and <emph>power</emph> of it also. Pentecost was the
flowing forth of a tide of spiritual influence which had hitherto been dammed up.
Henceforth the Holy Spirit was the Spirit of Jesus Christ, taking of the things of Christ
and showing them, applying his finished work to human hearts, and rendering the
hitherto localized Savior omnipresent with his scattered followers to the end of time.
</p>

<p>
Under the conditions of his humiliation, Christ was a servant. All authority in
heaven and earth was given him only after his resurrection. Hence he could not send
the Holy Spirit until he ascended. The mother can show off her son only when he is
fully grown. The Holy Spirit could reveal Christ only when there was a complete
Christ to reveal. The Holy Spirit could fully sanctify, only after the example and
motive of holiness were furnished in Christ's life and death. Archer Butler: <q>The
divine Artist could not fitly descend to make the copy, before the original had been
provided.</q>
</p>

<p>
And yet the Holy Spirit is <emph><q>the eternal Spirit</q> (Heb. 9:14)</emph>, and he not only existed, but also
wrought, in Old Testament times. <emph>2 Pet. 1:21&mdash;<q>men spake from God, being moved by the Holy Spirit</q></emph>&mdash;seems
to fix the meaning of the phrase <q>the Holy Spirit,</q> where it appears in the
O. T. Before Christ <emph><q>the Holy Spirit was not yet</q> (John 7:39)</emph>, just as before Edison electricity
was not yet. There was just as much electricity in the world before Edison as there is
now. Edison has only taught us its existence and how to use it. Still we can say that,
before Edison, electricity, as a means of lighting, warming and transporting people, had
no existence. So until Pentecost, the Holy Spirit, as the revealer of Christ, <q><emph>was not yet</emph>.</q>
Augustine calls Pentecost the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>dies natalis</foreign>, or birthday, of the Holy Spirit; and for the
same reason that we call the day when Mary brought forth her firstborn son the birthday
of Jesus Christ, though before Abraham was born, Christ was. The Holy Spirit had been
engaged in the creation, and had inspired the prophets, but <emph>officially</emph>, as Mediator
between men and Christ, <q><emph>the Holy Spirit was not yet</emph>.</q> He could not show the things of Christ
until the things of Christ were ready to be shown. See Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit,
19-25; Prof. J. S. Gubelmann, Person and Work of the Holy Spirit in O. T. Times.
For proofs of the deity of the Holy Spirit, see Walker, Doctrine of the Holy Spirit;
Hare, Mission of the Comforter; Parker, The Paraclete; Cardinal Manning, Temporal
Mission of the Holy Ghost; Dick, Lectures on Theology, 1:341-350. Further references
will be given in connection with the proof of the Holy Spirit's personality.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Intimations of the Old Testament.</head>

<p>
The passages which seem to show that even in the Old Testament there
are three who are implicitly recognized as God may be classed under four
heads:
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. Passages which seem to teach plurality of some sort in the Godhead.</head>

<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The plural noun אלהים is employed, and that with a plural verb&mdash;a
use remarkable, when we consider that the singular אל was also in existence;
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) God uses plural pronouns in speaking of himself; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Jehovah
distinguishes himself from Jehovah; (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) a Son is ascribed to Jehovah;
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) the Spirit of God is distinguished from God; (<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) there are a threefold
ascription and a threefold benediction.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <emph>Gen. 20:13&mdash;<q rend='pre'>God caused</q></emph> [plural] <emph><q rend='post'>me to wander from my father's house</q></emph>; <emph>35:7&mdash;<q rend='pre'>built there an altar,
and called the place El-Beth-el</q></emph>; <emph>because there God was revealed</emph> [plural] <emph><q rend='post'>unto him.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <emph>Gen. 1:26&mdash;<q>Let us make
man in our image, after our likeness</q></emph>; <emph>3:22&mdash;<q>Behold, the man is become as one of us</q></emph>; <emph>11:7&mdash;<q>Come, let us go
down, and there confound their language</q></emph>; <emph>Is. 6:8&mdash;<q>Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) <emph>Gen. 19:24&mdash;<q>Then
Jehovah rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from Jehovah out of heaven</q></emph>; <emph>Hos. 1:7&mdash;<q>I
will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save them by Jehovah, their God</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>2 Tim. 1:18&mdash;<q>The Lord
grant unto him to find mercy of the Lord in that day</q></emph>&mdash;though Ellicott here decides adversely to the
Trinitarian reference. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) <emph>Ps. 2:7&mdash;<q>Thou art my son; this day have I begotten thee</q></emph>; <emph>Prov. 30:4&mdash;<q>Who
hath established all the ends of the earth? What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou knowest?</q></emph>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) <emph>Gen. 1:1 and 2, marg.&mdash;<q>God created ... the Spirit of God was brooding</q></emph>; <emph>Ps. 33:6&mdash;<q rend='pre'>By the word of
Jehovah were the heavens made, And all the host of them by the breath</q></emph> [spirit] <emph><q rend='post'>of his mouth</q></emph>; <emph>Is. 48:16&mdash;<q>the
Lord Jehovah hath sent me, and his Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>63:7, 10&mdash;<q>loving kindnesses of Jehovah ... grieved his holy Spirit.</q></emph>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) <emph>Is. 6:3</emph>&mdash;the trisagion: <q><emph>Holy, holy, holy</emph></q>; <emph>Num. 6:24-26&mdash;<q>Jehovah bless thee, and keep thee: Jehovah
make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: Jehovah lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
It has been suggested that as Baal was worshiped in different places and under different
names, as Baal-Berith, Baal-hanan, Baal-peor, Baal-zeebub, and his priests could
call upon any one of these as possessing certain personified attributes of Baal, while
yet the whole was called by the plural term <q>Baalim,</q> and Elijah could say: <q>Call ye
upon your Gods,</q> so <q>Elohim</q> may be the collective designation of the God who was
worshiped in different localities; see Robertson Smith, Old Testament in the Jewish
Church, 229. But this ignores the fact that Baal is always addressed in the singular, never
in the plural, while the plural <q>Elohim</q> is the term commonly used in addresses to God.
This seems to show that <q>Baalim</q> is a collective term, while <q>Elohim</q> is not. So when
Ewald, Lehre von Gott, 2:333, distinguishes five names of God, corresponding to five
great periods of the history of Israel, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>, the <q>Almighty</q> of the Patriarchs, the
<q>Jehovah</q> of the Covenant, the <q>God of Hosts</q> of the Monarchy, the <q>Holy One</q>
of the Deuteronomist and the later prophetic age, and the <q>Our Lord</q> of Judaism, he
ignores the fact that these designations are none of them confined to the times to which
they are attributed, though they may have been predominantly used in those times.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The fact that אלהים is sometimes used in a narrower sense, as applicable
to the Son (Ps. 45:6; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Heb. 1:8), need not prevent us from believing
that the term was originally chosen as containing an allusion to a certain
plurality in the divine nature. Nor is it sufficient to call this plural a
simple <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pluralis majestaticus</foreign>; since it is easier to derive this common
figure from divine usage than to derive the divine usage from this common
figure&mdash;especially when we consider the constant tendency of Israel to
polytheism.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Ps. 45:6</emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Heb. 1:8&mdash;<q>of the Son he saith, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever.</q></emph> Here it is God who
calls Christ <q><emph>God</emph></q> or <q><emph>Elohim</emph>.</q> The term Elohim has here acquired the significance of a
singular. It was once thought that the royal style of speech was a custom of a later
date than the time of Moses. Pharaoh does not use it. In <emph>Gen. 41:41-44</emph>, he says: <emph><q>I have
set thee over all the land of Egypt ... I am Pharaoh.</q></emph> But later investigations seem to prove that
the plural for God was used by the Canaanites before the Hebrew occupation. The
one Pharaoh is called <q>my gods</q> or <q>my god,</q> indifferently. The word <q>master</q> is
usually found in the plural in the O. T. (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Gen. 24:9, 51</emph>; <emph>39:19</emph>; <emph>40:1</emph>). The plural gives
utterance to the sense of awe. It signifies magnitude or completeness. (See The Bible
Student, Aug. 1900:67.)
</p>

<p>
This ancient Hebrew application of the plural to God is often explained as a mere
plural of dignity, = one who combines in himself many reasons for adoration (אלהים
from אלה to fear, to adore). Oehler, O. T. Theology, 1:128-130, calls it a <q>quantitative
plural,</q> signifying unlimited greatness. The Hebrews had many plural forms, where
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
we should use the singular, as <q>heavens</q> instead of <q>heaven,</q> <q>waters</q> instead of
<q>water.</q> We too speak of <q>news,</q> <q>wages,</q> and say <q>you</q> instead of <q>thou</q>; see F. W.
Robertson, on Genesis, 12. But the Church Fathers, such as Barnabas, Justin Martyr,
Irenæus, Theophilus, Epiphanius, and Theodoret, saw in this plural an allusion to the
Trinity, and we are inclined to follow them. When finite things were pluralized to
express man's reverence, it would be far more natural to pluralize the name of God.
And God's purpose in securing this pluralization may have been more far-reaching
and intelligent than man's. The Holy Spirit who presided over the development of
revelation may well have directed the use of the plural in general, and even the adoption
of the plural name Elohim in particular, with a view to the future unfolding of
truth with regard to the Trinity.
</p>

<p>
We therefore dissent from the view of Hill, Genetic Philosophy, 323, 330&mdash;<q>The
Hebrew religion, even much later than the time of Moses, as it existed in the popular
mind, was, according to the prophetic writings, far removed from a real monotheism,
and consisted in the wavering acceptance of the preëminence of a tribal God, with a
strong inclination towards a general polytheism. It is impossible therefore to suppose
that anything approaching the philosophical monotheism of modern theology could
have been elaborated or even entertained by primitive man.... <emph><q>Thou shalt have no other
gods before me</q> (Ex. 20:3)</emph>, the first precept of Hebrew monotheism, was not understood at
first as a denial of the hereditary polytheistic faith, but merely as an exclusive claim
to worship and obedience.</q> E. G. Robinson says, in a similar strain, that <q>we can
explain the idolatrous tendencies of the Jews only on the supposition that they had
lurking notions that their God was a merely national god. Moses seems to have understood
the doctrine of the divine unity, but the Jews did not.</q>
</p>

<p>
To the views of both Hill and Robinson we reply that the primitive intuition of God
is not that of many, but that of One. Paul tells us that polytheism is a later and retrogressive
stage of development, due to man's sin (<emph>Rom. 1:19-25</emph>). We prefer the statement
of McLaren: <q>The plural Elohim is not a survival from a polytheistic stage, but
expresses the divine nature in the manifoldness of its fulnesses and perfections, rather
than in the abstract unity of its being</q>&mdash;and, we may add, expresses the divine nature
in its essential fulness, as a complex of personalities. See Conant, Gesenius' Hebrew
Grammar, 108; Green, Hebrew Grammar, 306; Girdlestone, O. T. Synonyms, 38, 53;
Alexander on <emph>Psalm 11:7</emph>; <emph>29:1</emph>; <emph>58:11</emph>.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. Passages relating to the Angel of Jehovah.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The angel of Jehovah identifies himself with Jehovah; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) he is
identified with Jehovah by others; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) he accepts worship due only to
God. Though the phrase <q>angel of Jehovah</q> is sometimes used in the
later Scriptures to denote a merely human messenger or created angel, it
seems in the Old Testament, with hardly more than a single exception, to
designate the pre-incarnate Logos, whose manifestations in angelic or
human form foreshadowed his final coming in the flesh.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <emph>Gen. 22:11, 16&mdash;<q rend='pre'>the angel of Jehovah called unto him</q></emph> [Abraham, when about to sacrifice Isaac]
... <emph><q rend='post'>By myself have I sworn, saith Jehovah</q></emph>; <emph>31:11, 13&mdash;<q rend='pre'>the angel of God said unto me</q></emph> [Jacob] ... <emph><q rend='post'>I am the
God of Beth-el.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <emph>Gen. 16:9, 13&mdash;<q>angel of Jehovah said unto her ... and she called the name of Jehovah that
spake unto her, Thou art a God that seeth</q></emph>; <emph>48:15, 16&mdash;<q>the God who hath fed me ... the angel who hath redeemed
me.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) <emph>Ex. 3:2, 4, 5&mdash;<q>the angel of Jehovah appeared unto him ... God called unto him out of the midst of the
bush ... put off thy shoes from off thy feet</q></emph>; <emph>Judges 13:20-22&mdash;<q>angel of Jehovah ascended.... Manoah and his
wife ... fell on their faces ... Manoah said ... We shall surely die, because we have seen God.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
The <q><emph>angel of the Lord</emph></q> appears to be a human messenger in <emph>Haggai 1:13&mdash;<q>Haggai, Jehovah's messenger</q></emph>;
a created angel in <emph>Mat. 1:20&mdash;<q rend='pre'>an angel of the Lord</q></emph> [called Gabriel] <emph><q rend='post'>appeared unto</q></emph> Joseph;
in <emph>Acts 3:26&mdash;<q>an angel of the Lord spake unto Philip</q></emph>; and in <emph>12:7&mdash;<q>an angel of the Lord stood by him</q></emph>
(Peter). But commonly, in the O.T., the <emph><q>angel of Jehovah</q></emph> is a theophany, a self-manifestation
of God. The only distinction is that between Jehovah in himself and Jehovah
in manifestation. The appearances of <q><emph>the angel of Jehovah</emph></q> seem to be preliminary manifestations
of the divine Logos, as in <emph>Gen. 18:2, 13&mdash;<q rend='pre'>three men stood over against him</q></emph> [Abraham]
... <emph><q rend='post'>And Jehovah said unto Abraham</q></emph>; <emph>Dan. 3:25, 28&mdash;<q>the aspect of the fourth is like a son of the gods.... Blessed be
the God ... who hath sent his angel.</q></emph> The N.T. <q><emph>angel of the Lord</emph></q> does not permit, the O.T. <q><emph>angel
of the Lord</emph></q> requires, worship (<emph>Rev. 22:8, 9&mdash;<q>See thou do it not</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Ex. 3:5&mdash;<q>put off thy shoes</q></emph>). As
supporting this interpretation, see Hengstenberg, Christology, 1:107-123; J. Pye Smith,
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
Scripture Testimony to the Messiah. As opposing it, see Hofmann, Schriftbeweis, 1:329,
378; Kurtz, History of Old Covenant, 1:181. On the whole subject, see Bib. Sac.,
1879:593-615.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>C. Descriptions of the divine Wisdom and Word.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Wisdom is represented as distinct from God, and as eternally existing
with God; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the Word of God is distinguished from God, as executor
of his will from everlasting.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <emph>Prov. 8:1&mdash;<q>Doth not wisdom cry?</q></emph> <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <emph>Mat. 11:19&mdash;<q>wisdom is justified by her works</q></emph>; <emph>Luke 7:35&mdash;<q>wisdom
is justified of all her children</q></emph>; <emph>11:49&mdash;<q>Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send unto them prophets
and apostles</q></emph>; <emph>Prov. 8:22, 30, 31&mdash;<q>Jehovah possessed me in the beginning of his way, Before his works of old.... I
was by him, as a master workman: And I was daily his delight.... And my delight was with the sons of men</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>3:19&mdash;<q>Jehovah
by wisdom founded the earth,</q></emph> and <emph>Heb. 1:2&mdash;<q>his Son ... through whom ... he made the
worlds.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <emph>Ps. 107:20&mdash;<q>He sendeth his word, and healeth them</q></emph>; <emph>119:89&mdash;<q>For ever, O Jehovah, Thy word is
settled in heaven</q></emph>; <emph>147:15-18&mdash;<q>He sendeth out his commandment.... He sendeth out his word.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
In the Apocryphal book entitled Wisdom, 7:26, 28, wisdom is described as <q>the
brightness of the eternal light,</q> <q>the unspotted mirror of God's majesty,</q> and <q>the
image of his goodness</q>&mdash;reminding us of <emph>Heb. 1:3&mdash;<q>the effulgence of his glory, and the very image of
his substance.</q></emph> In Wisdom, 9:9, 10, wisdom is represented as being present with God when
he made the world, and the author of the book prays that wisdom may be sent to him
out of God's holy heavens and from the throne of his glory. In 1 Esdras 4:35-38, Truth
in a similar way is spoken of as personal: <q>Great is the Truth and stronger than all
things. All the earth calleth upon the Truth, and the heaven blesseth it; all works
shake and tremble at it, and with it is no unrighteous thing. As for the Truth, it
endureth and is always strong; it liveth and conquereth forevermore.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It must be acknowledged that in none of these descriptions is the idea of
personality clearly developed. Still less is it true that John the apostle
derived his doctrine of the Logos from the interpretations of these descriptions
in Philo Judæus. John's doctrine (John 1:1-18) is radically different
from the Alexandrian Logos-idea of Philo. This last is a Platonizing
speculation upon the mediating principle between God and the world.
Philo seems at times to verge towards a recognition of personality in the
Logos, though his monotheistic scruples lead him at other times to take
back what he has given, and to describe the Logos either as the thought of
God or as its expression in the world. But John is the first to present
to us a consistent view of this personality, to identify the Logos with the
Messiah, and to distinguish the Word from the Spirit of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Dorner, in his History of the Doctrine of the Person of Christ, 1:13-45, and in his
System of Doctrine, 1:348, 349, gives the best account of Philo's doctrine of the Logos.
He says that Philo calls the Logos ἀρχάγγελος, ἀρχιερεύς, δεύτερος θεός. Whether this is
anything more than personification is doubtful, for Philo also calls the Logos the κόσμος
νοητός. Certainly, so far as he makes the Logos a distinct personality, he makes him
also a subordinate being. It is charged that the doctrine of the Trinity owes its origin
to the Platonic philosophy in its Alexandrian union with Jewish theology. But Platonism
had no Trinity. The truth is that by the doctrine of the Trinity Christianity
secured itself against false heathen ideas of God's multiplicity and immanence, as
well as against false Jewish ideas of God's unity and transcendence. It owes nothing
to foreign sources.
</p>

<p>
We need not assign to John's gospel a later origin, in order to account for its doctrine
of the Logos, any more than we need to assign a later origin to the Synoptics in order to
account for their doctrine of a suffering Messiah. Both doctrines were equally
unknown to Philo. Philo's Logos does not and cannot become man. So says Dorner.
Westcott, in Bible Commentary on John, Introd., xv-xviii, and on John 1:1&mdash;<q>The theological
use of the term [in John's gospel] appears to be derived directly from the
Palestinian <foreign rend='italic'>Memra</foreign>, and not from the Alexandrian <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Logos</foreign>.</q> Instead of Philo's doctrine
being a stepping-stone from Judaism to Christianity, it was a stumbling-stone. It had
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
no doctrine of the Messiah or of the atonement. Bennett and Adeny, Bib. Introd., 340&mdash;<q>The
difference between Philo and John may be stated thus: Philo's Logos is Reason,
while John's is Word; Philo's is impersonal, while John's is personal; Philo's is not
incarnate, while John's is incarnate; Philo's is not the Messiah, while John's is the
Messiah.</q>
</p>

<p>
Philo lived from B. C. 10 or 20 to certainly A. D. 40, when he went at the head of a
Jewish embassy to Rome, to persuade the Emperor to abstain from claiming divine
honor from the Jews. In his De Opifice Mundi he says: <q>The Word is nothing else but
the intelligible world.</q> He calls the Word the <q>chainband,</q> <q>pilot,</q> <q>steersman,</q> of
all things. Gore, Incarnation, 69&mdash;<q>Logos in Philo must be translated <q>Reason.</q>
But in the Targums, or early Jewish paraphrases of the O. T., the <q>Word</q> of Jehovah
(<foreign rend='italic'>Memra</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Devra</foreign>) is constantly spoken of as the efficient instrument of the divine
action, in cases where the O. T. speaks of Jehovah himself, <q>The Word of God</q> had
come to be used personally, as almost equivalent to God manifesting himself, or God
in action.</q> George H. Gilbert, in Biblical World, Jan. 1899:44&mdash;<q>John's use of the
term Logos was suggested by Greek philosophy, while at the same time the content of
the word is Jewish.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hatch, Hibbert Lectures, 174-208&mdash;<q>The Stoics invested the Logos with personality.
They were Monists and they made λόγος and ὕλη the active and the passive forms of the
one principle. Some made God a mode of matter&mdash;<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>natura naturata</foreign>; others made matter
a mode of God&mdash;<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>natura naturans</foreign> = the world a self-evolution of God. The Platonic
forms, as manifold expressions of a single λόγος, were expressed by a singular term,
Logos, rather than the Logoi, of God. From this Logos proceed all forms of mind or
reason. So held Philo: <q>The mind is an offshoot from the divine and happy soul (of
God), an offshoot not separated from him, for nothing divine is cut off and disjoined,
but only extended.</q> Philo's Logos is not only form but force&mdash;God's creative energy&mdash;the
eldest-born of the <q>I am,</q> which robes itself with the world as with a vesture, the
high priest's robe, embroidered with all the forces of the seen and unseen worlds.</q>
</p>

<p>
Wendt, Teaching of Jesus, 1:53&mdash;<q>Philo carries the transcendence of God to its
logical conclusions. The Jewish doctrine of angels is expanded in his doctrine of the
Logos. The Alexandrian philosophers afterwards represented Christianity as a spiritualized
Judaism. But a philosophical system dominated by the idea of the divine transcendence
never could have furnished a motive for missionary labors like those of Paul.
Philo's belief in transcendence abated his redemptive hopes. But, conversely, the
redemptive hopes of orthodox Judaism saved it from some of the errors of exclusive
transcendence.</q> See a quotation from Siegfried, in Schürer's History of the Jewish
People, article on Philo: <q>Philo's doctrine grew out of God's distinction and distance
from the world. It was dualistic. Hence the need of mediating principles, some
being less than God and more than creature. The cosmical significance of Christ
bridged the gulf between Christianity and contemporary Greek thought. Christianity
stands for a God who is revealed. But a Logos-doctrine like that of Philo may
reveal less than it conceals. Instead of God incarnate for our salvation, we may
have merely a mediating principle between God and the world, as in Arianism.</q>
</p>

<p>
The preceding statement is furnished in substance by Prof. William Adams Brown.
With it we agree, adding only the remark that the Alexandrian philosophy gave to
Christianity, not the substance of its doctrine, but only the terminology for its expression.
The truth which Philo groped after, the Apostle John seized and published, as
only he could, who had heard, seen, and handled <emph><q>the Word of life</q> (1 John 1:1).</emph> <q>The Christian
doctrine of the Logos was perhaps before anything else an effort to express how
Jesus Christ was God (Θεός), and yet in another sense was not God (ὁ θεός); that is to
say, was not the whole Godhead</q> (quoted in Marcus Dods, Expositors' Bible, on <emph>John 1:1</emph>).
See also Kendrick, in Christian Review, 26:369-399; Gloag, in Presb. and Ref. Rev.,
1891:45-57; Réville, Doctrine of the Logos in John and Philo; Godet on John, Germ.
transl., 13, 135; Cudworth, Intellectual System, 2:320-333; Pressensé, Life of Jesus
Christ, 83; Hagenbach, Hist. Doct., 1:114-117; Liddon, Our Lord's Divinity, 59-71;
Conant on Proverbs, 53.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>D. Descriptions of the Messiah.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) He is one with Jehovah; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) yet he is in some sense distinct from
Jehovah.
</p>

<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <emph>Is. 9:6&mdash;<q>unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given ... and his name shall be called Wonderful Counselor,
Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace</q></emph>; <emph>Micah 5:2&mdash;<q>thou Bethlehem ... which art little ... out of thee
shall one come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth are from of old, from everlasting.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <emph>Ps. 45:6, 7&mdash;<q>Thy
throne, O God, is for ever and ever.... Therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee</q></emph>; <emph>Mal 3:1&mdash;<q>I send my
messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, will suddenly come to his temple; and the
messenger of the covenant, whom ye desire.</q></emph> Henderson, in his Commentary on this passage, points
out that the Messiah is here called <q><emph>the Lord</emph></q> or <q><emph>the Sovereign</emph></q>&mdash;a title nowhere given in
this form (with the article) to any but Jehovah; that he is predicted as coming to the
temple as its proprietor; and that he is identified with the angel of the covenant, elsewhere
shown to be one with Jehovah himself.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It is to be remembered, in considering this, as well as other classes of
passages previously cited, that no Jewish writer before Christ's coming had
succeeded in constructing from them a doctrine of the Trinity. Only to
those who bring to them the light of New Testament revelation do they
show their real meaning.
</p>

<p>
Our general conclusion with regard to the Old Testament intimations
must therefore be that, while they do not by themselves furnish a sufficient
basis for the doctrine of the Trinity, they contain the germ of it, and may
be used in confirmation of it when its truth is substantially proved from
the New Testament.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
That the doctrine of the Trinity is not plainly taught in the Hebrew Scriptures is
evident from the fact that Jews unite with Mohammedans in accusing trinitarians of
polytheism. It should not surprise us that the Old Testament teaching on this subject
is undeveloped and obscure. The first necessity was that the Unity of God should be
insisted on. Until the danger of idolatry was past, a clear revelation of the Trinity
might have been a hindrance to religious progress. The child now, like the race then,
must learn the unity of God before it can profitably be taught the Trinity,&mdash;else it will
fall into tritheism; see Gardiner, O. T. and N. T., 49. We should not therefore begin
our proof of the Trinity with a reference to passages in the Old Testament. We should
speak of these passages, indeed, as furnishing intimations of the doctrine rather than
proof of it. Yet, after having found proof of the doctrine in the New Testament, we
may expect to find traces of it in the Old which will corroborate our conclusions. As a
matter of fact, we shall see that traces of the idea of a Trinity are found not only in the
Hebrew Scriptures but in some of the heathen religions as well. E. G. Robinson: <q>The
doctrine of the Trinity underlay the O. T., unperceived by its writers, was first recognized
in the economic revelation of Christianity, and was first clearly enunciated in the
necessary evolution of Christian doctrine.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. These Three are so described in Scripture that we are compelled
to conceive of them as distinct Persons.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. The Father and the Son are persons distinct from each other.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Christ distinguishes the Father from himself as <q>another</q>; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the
Father and the Son are distinguished as the begetter and the begotten;
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the Father and the Son are distinguished as the sender and the sent.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <emph>John 5:32, 37&mdash;<q>It is another that beareth witness of me ... the Father that sent me, he hath borne witness
of me.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <emph>Ps. 2:7&mdash;<q>Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee</q></emph>; <emph>John 1:14&mdash;<q>the only begotten from the
Father</q></emph>; <emph>18&mdash;<q>the only begotten Son</q></emph>; <emph>3:16&mdash;<q>gave his only begotten Son.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) <emph>John 10:36&mdash;<q>say ye of him,
whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?</q></emph>; <emph>Gal 4:4&mdash;<q>when
the fulness of the time came, God sent forth his Son.</q></emph> In these passages the Father is represented
as objective to the Son, the Son to the Father, and both the Father and Son to the Spirit.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. The Father and the Son are persons distinct from the Spirit.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Jesus distinguishes the Spirit from himself and from the Father;
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the Spirit proceeds from the Father; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the Spirit is sent by the
Father and by the Son.
</p>

<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <emph>John 14:16, 17&mdash;<q>I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for
ever, even the Spirit of truth</q></emph>&mdash;or <q><emph>Spirit of the truth</emph>,</q> = he whose work it is to reveal and apply the
truth, and especially to make manifest him who is the truth. Jesus had been their
Comforter: he now promises them another Comforter. If he himself was a person,
then the Spirit is a person. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <emph>John 15:26&mdash;<q>the Spirit of truth which proceedeth from the Father.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>)
<emph>John 14:26&mdash;<q>the Comforter, even the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name</q></emph>; <emph>15:26&mdash;<q>when the Comforter
is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father</q></emph>; <emph>Gal. 4:6&mdash;<q>God sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our
hearts.</q></emph> The Greek church holds that the Spirit proceeds from the Father only; the
Latin church, that the Spirit proceeds both from the Father and from the Son. The
true formula is: The Spirit proceeds from the Father <emph>through</emph> or <emph>by</emph> (not <q>and</q>) the
Son. See Hagenbach, History of Doctrine, 1:262, 263. Moberly, Atonement and Personality,
195&mdash;<q>The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Filioque</foreign> is a valuable defence of the truth that the Holy Spirit is
not simply the abstract second Person of the Trinity, but rather the Spirit of the
incarnate Christ, reproducing Christ in human hearts, and revealing in them the meaning
of true manhood.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. The Holy Spirit is a person.</head>

<p>
A. Designations proper to personality are given him.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The masculine pronoun ἐκεῖνος, though πνεῦμα is neuter; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the
name παράκλητος, which cannot be translated by <q>comfort</q>, or be taken as
the name of any abstract influence. The Comforter, Instructor, Patron,
Guide, Advocate, whom this term brings before us, must be a person. This
is evident from its application to Christ in 1 John 2:1&mdash;<q>we have an
Advocate&mdash;παράκλητον&mdash;with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <emph>John 16:14&mdash;<q>He (ἐκεῖνος) shall glorify me</q></emph>; in <emph>Eph. 1:14</emph> also, some of the best authorities,
including Tischendorf (8th ed.), read ὄς, the masculine pronoun: <q><emph>who is an earnest of our
inheritance</emph>.</q> But in <emph>John 14:16-18</emph>, παράκλητος is followed by the neuters ὁ and αὐτό, because
πνεῦμα had intervened. Grammatical and not theological considerations controlled the
writer. See G. B. Stevens, Johannine Theology, 189-217, especially on the distinction
between Christ and the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is another person than Christ, in
spite of Christ's saying of the coming of the Holy Spirit: <q><emph>I come unto you</emph>.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <emph>John 16:7&mdash;<q>if
I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you.</q></emph> The word παράκλητος, as appears from <emph>1 John
2:1</emph>, quoted above, is a term of broader meaning than merely <emph><q>Comforter.</q></emph> The Holy
Spirit is, indeed, as has been said, <q>the mother-principle in the Godhead,</q> and <q><emph>as one
whom his mother comforteth</emph></q> so God by his Spirit comforts his children (<emph>Is. 66:13</emph>). But the Holy
Spirit is also an Advocate of God's claims in the soul, and of the soul's interests in
prayer (<emph>Rom. 8:26&mdash;<q>maketh intercession for us</q></emph>). He comforts not only by being our advocate,
but by being our instructor, patron, and guide; and all these ideas are found attaching
to the word παράκλητος in good Greek usage. The word indeed is a verbal adjective,
signifying <q>called to one's aid,</q> hence a <q>helper</q>; the idea of encouragement is included
in it, as well as those of comfort and of advocacy. See Westcott, Bible Com., on
<emph>John 14:16</emph>; Cremer, Lexicon of N. T. Greek, <hi rend='italic'>in voce</hi>.
</p>

<p>
T. Dwight, in S. S. Times, on <emph>John 14:16</emph>&mdash;<q>The fundamental meaning of the word
παράκλητος, which is a verbal adjective, is <q>called to one's aid,</q> and thus, when used as
a noun, it conveys the idea of <q>helper.</q> This more general sense probably attaches
to its use in John's Gospel, while in the Epistle (<emph>1 John 2:1, 2</emph>) it conveys the idea of Jesus
acting as advocate on our behalf before God as a Judge.</q> So the Latin <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>advocatus</foreign> signifies
one <q>called to</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, called in to aid, counsel, plead. In this connection Jesus
says: <emph><q>I will not leave you orphans</q> (John 14:18)</emph>. Cumming, Through the Eternal Spirit, 228&mdash;<q>As
the orphaned family, in the day of the parent's death, need some friend who shall
lighten their sense of loss by his own presence with them, so the Holy Spirit is <q>called in</q>
to supply the present love and help which the Twelve are losing in the death of Jesus.</q>
A. A. Hodge, Pop. Lectures, 237&mdash;<q>The Roman <q>client,</q> the poor and dependent man,
called in his <q>patron</q> to help him in all his needs. The patron thought for, advised,
directed, supported, defended, supplied, restored, comforted his client in all his complications.
The client, though weak, with a powerful patron, was socially and politically
secure forever.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. His name is mentioned in immediate connection with other persons,
and in such a way as to imply his own personality.
</p>

<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) In connection with Christians; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) in connection with Christ; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>)
in connection with the Father and the Son. If the Father and the Son are
persons, the Spirit must be a person also.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <emph>Acts 15:28&mdash;<q>it seemed good to the Holy Spirit, and to us.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <emph>John 16:14&mdash;<q>He shall glorify me: for he
shall take of mine, and shall declare it unto you</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>17:4&mdash;<q>I glorified thee on the earth.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) <emph>Mat. 28:29&mdash;<q>baptizing
them into the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>2 Cor. 13:14&mdash;<q>the grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all</q></emph>; <emph>Jude 21&mdash;<q>praying in the Holy
Spirit, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ.</q></emph> <emph>1 Pet. 1:1, 2&mdash;<q>elect ...
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood
of Jesus Christ.</q></emph> Yet it is noticeable in all these passages that there is no obtrusion of
the Holy Spirit's personality, as if he desired to draw attention to himself. The Holy
Spirit shows, not himself, but Christ. Like John the Baptist, he is a mere voice, and
so is an example to Christian preachers, who are themselves <emph><q>made ... sufficient as ministers
... of the Spirit</q> (2 Cor. 3:6)</emph>. His leading is therefore often unperceived; he so joins himself
to us that we infer his presence only from the new and holy exercises of our own
minds; he continues to work in us even when his presence is ignored and his purity is
outraged by our sins.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. He performs acts proper to personality.
</p>

<p>
That which searches, knows, speaks, testifies, reveals, convinces, commands,
strives, moves, helps, guides, creates, recreates, sanctifies, inspires,
makes intercession, orders the affairs of the church, performs miracles,
raises the dead&mdash;cannot be a mere power, influence, efflux, or attribute of
God, but must be a person.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Gen. 1:2</emph>, marg.&mdash;<q><emph>the Spirit of God was brooding upon the face of the waters</emph></q>; <emph>6:3&mdash;<q>My Spirit shalt not strive
with man for ever</q></emph>; <emph>Luke 12:12&mdash;<q>the Holy Spirit shall teach you in that very hour what ye ought to say</q></emph>; <emph>John 3:8&mdash;<q>born
of the Spirit</q></emph>&mdash;here Bengel translates: <q><emph>the Spirit breathes where he wills, and thou hearest his
voice</emph></q>&mdash;see also Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 166; <emph>16:8&mdash;<q>convict the world in respect of sin,
and of righteousness, and of judgment</q></emph>; <emph>Acts 2:4&mdash;<q>the Spirit gave them utterance</q></emph>; <emph>8:29&mdash;<q>the Spirit said
unto Philip, Go near</q></emph>; <emph>10:19, 20&mdash;<q rend='pre'>the Spirit said unto him</q></emph> [Peter], <emph><q rend='post'>Behold, three men seek thee.... go with
them ... for I have sent them</q></emph>; <emph>13:2&mdash;<q>the Holy Spirit said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul</q></emph>; <emph>16:6, 7&mdash;<q>forbidden
of the Holy Spirit ... Spirit of Jesus suffered them not</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 8:11&mdash;<q>give life also to your mortal bodies
through his Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>26&mdash;<q>the Spirit also helpeth our infirmity ... maketh intercession for us</q></emph>; <emph>15:19&mdash;<q>in
the power of signs and wonders, in the power of the Holy Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 2:10, 11&mdash;<q>the Spirit searcheth all things....
things of God none knoweth, save the Spirit of God</q></emph>; <emph>12:8-11</emph>&mdash;distributes spiritual gifts <emph><q>to each one
severally even as he will</q></emph>&mdash;here Meyer calls attention to the words <emph><q>as he will,</q></emph> as proving the
personality of the Spirit; <emph>2 Pet. 1:21&mdash;<q>men spake from God, being moved by the Holy Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>1 Pet. 1:2&mdash;<q>sanctification
of the Spirit.</q></emph> How can a person be given in various measures? We answer,
by being permitted to work in our behalf with various degrees of power. Dorner:
<q>To be power does not belong to the impersonal.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
D. He is affected as a person by the acts of others.
</p>

<p>
That which can be resisted, grieved, vexed, blasphemed, must be a person;
for only a person can perceive insult and be offended. The blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost cannot be merely blasphemy against a
power or attribute of God, since in that case blasphemy against God would
be a less crime than blasphemy against his power. That against which
the unpardonable sin can be committed must be a person.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Is. 63:10&mdash;<q>they rebelled and grieved his holy Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>Mat. 12:31&mdash;<q>Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven
unto men; but the blasphemy against the Spirit shall not be forgiven</q></emph>; <emph>Acts 5:3, 4, 9&mdash;<q>lie to the Holy Ghost ...
thou hast not lied unto men but unto God.... agreed together to try the Spirit of the Lord</q></emph>; <emph>7:51&mdash;<q>ye do always
resist the Holy Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 4:30&mdash;<q>grieve not the Holy Spirit of God.</q></emph> Satan cannot be <q>grieved.</q>
Selfishness can be angered, but only love can be grieved. Blaspheming the Holy Spirit
is like blaspheming one's own mother. The passages just quoted show the Spirit's possession
of an emotional nature. Hence we read of <emph><q>the love of the Spirit</q> (Rom. 15:30)</emph>. The
unutterable sighings of the Christian in intercessory prayer (<emph>Rom. 8:26, 27</emph>) reveal the mind
of the Spirit, and show the infinite depths of feeling which are awakened in God's
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
heart by the sins and needs of men. These deep desires and emotions which are only
partially communicated to us, and which only God can understand, are conclusive
proof that the Holy Spirit is a person. They are only the overflow into us of the
infinite fountain of divine love to which the Holy Spirit unites us.
</p>

<p>
As Christ in the garden <emph><q>began to be sorrowful and sore troubled</q> (Mat. 26:37)</emph>, so the Holy Spirit
is sorrowful and sore troubled at the ignoring, despising, resisting of his work, on the
part of those whom he is trying to rescue from sin and to lead out into the freedom
and joy of the Christian life. Luthardt, in S. S. Times, May 26, 1888&mdash;<q>Every sin can
be forgiven&mdash;even the sin against the Son of man&mdash;except the sin against the Holy
Spirit. The sin against the Son of man can be forgiven because he can be misconceived.
For he did not appear as that which he really was. Essence and appearance, truth and
reality, contradicted each other.</q> Hence Jesus could pray: <emph><q>Father, forgive them, for they know
not what they do</q> (Luke 23:34)</emph>. The office of the Holy Spirit, however, is to show to men
the nature of their conduct, and to sin against him is to sin against light and without
excuse. See A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 297-313. Salmond, in Expositor's Greek
Testament, on <emph>Eph. 4:30</emph>&mdash;<q>What love is in us points truly, though tremulously, to what
love is in God. But in us love, in proportion as it is true and sovereign, has both its
<emph>wrath-side</emph> and its <emph>grief-side</emph>; and so must it be with God, however difficult for us to
think it out.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
E. He manifests himself in visible form as distinct from the Father and
the Son, yet in direct connection with personal acts performed by them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Mat. 3:16, 17&mdash;<q>Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway from the water: and lo, the heavens were opened
unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and coming upon him; and lo, a voice out of the heavens, saying,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased</q></emph>; <emph>Luke 3:21, 22&mdash;<q>Jesus also having been baptized, and praying, the
heaven was opened, and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form, as a dove, upon him, and a voice came out of heaven, Thou
art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased.</q></emph> Here are the prayer of Jesus, the approving voice
of the Father, and the Holy Spirit descending in visible form to anoint the Son of God
for his work. <q>I ad Jordanem, et videbis Trinitatem.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
F. This ascription to the Spirit of a personal subsistence distinct from
that of the Father and of the Son cannot be explained as personification;
for:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) This would be to interpret sober prose by the canons of poetry.
Such sustained personification is contrary to the genius of even Hebrew
poetry, in which Wisdom itself is most naturally interpreted as designating
a personal existence. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Such an interpretation would render a multitude
of passages either tautological, meaningless, or absurd,&mdash;as can be easily
seen by substituting for the name Holy Spirit the terms which are wrongly
held to be its equivalents; such as the power, or influence, or efflux, or
attribute of God. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It is contradicted, moreover, by all those passages
in which the Holy Spirit is distinguished from his own gifts.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The Bible is not primarily a book of poetry, although there is poetry in it. It is
more properly a book of history and law. Even if the methods of allegory were used
by the Psalmists and the Prophets, we should not expect them largely to characterize
the Gospels and Epistles; <emph>1 Cor. 13:4&mdash;<q>Love suffereth long, and is kind</q></emph>&mdash;is a rare instance in
which Paul's style takes on the form of poetry. Yet it is the Gospels and Epistles
which most constantly represent the Holy Spirit as a person. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <emph>Acts 10:38&mdash;<q rend='pre'>God anointed
him</q></emph> [Jesus] <emph><q rend='post'>with the Holy Spirit and with power</q></emph> = anointed him with power and with power? <emph>Rom.
15:13&mdash;<q>abound in hope, in the power of the Holy Spirit</q></emph> = in the power of the power of God? <emph>19&mdash;<q>in
the power of signs and wonders, in the power of the Holy Spirit</q></emph> = in the power of the power of God? <emph>1 Cor.
2:4&mdash;<q>demonstration of the Spirit and of power</q></emph> = demonstration of power and of power? (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>)
<emph>Luke 1:35&mdash;<q>the Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee</q></emph>; <emph>4:14&mdash;<q>Jesus
returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 12:4, 8, 11</emph>&mdash;after mention of the gifts of the
Spirit, such as wisdom, knowledge, faith, healings, miracles, prophecy, discerning of
spirits, tongues, interpretation of tongues, all these are traced to the Spirit who
bestows them: <q><emph>all these worketh the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each one severally even as he will</emph>.</q>
Here is not only giving, but giving discreetly, in the exercise of an independent will
such as belongs only to a person. <emph>Rom. 8:26&mdash;<q>the Spirit himself maketh intercession for us</q></emph>&mdash;must
be interpreted, if the Holy Spirit is not a person distinct from the Father, as meaning
that the Holy Spirit intercedes with himself.
</p>

<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>

<p>
<q>The personality of the Holy Spirit was virtually rejected by the Arians, as it has
since been by Schleiermacher, and it has been positively denied by the Socinians</q>
(E. G. Robinson). Gould, Bib. Theol. N. T., 83, 96&mdash;<q>The Twelve represent the Spirit
as sent by the Son, who has been exalted that he may send this new power out of the
heavens. Paul represents the Spirit as bringing to us the Christ. In the Spirit Christ
dwells in us. The Spirit is the historic Jesus translated into terms of universal Spirit.
Through the Spirit we are in Christ and Christ in us. The divine Indweller is to Paul
alternately Christ and the Spirit. The Spirit is the divine principle incarnate in Jesus
and explaining his preëxistence (<emph>2 Cor. 3:17, 18</emph>). Jesus was an incarnation of the Spirit
of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
This seeming identification of the Spirit with Christ is to be explained upon the
ground that the divine essence is common to both and permits the Father to dwell in
and to work through the Son, and the Son to dwell in and to work through the Spirit.
It should not blind us to the equally patent Scriptural fact that there are personal
relations between Christ and the Holy Spirit, and work done by the latter in which
Christ is the object and not the subject; <emph>John 16:14&mdash;<q>He shall glorify me: for he shall take of mine,
and shall declare it unto you.</q></emph> The Holy Spirit is not some <emph>thing</emph>, but some <emph>one</emph>; not αὐτό, but
Αὐτός; Christ's <emph>alter ego</emph>, or other self. We should therefore make vivid our belief in
the personality of Christ and of the Holy Spirit by addressing each of them frequently
in the prayers we offer and in such hymns as <q>Jesus, lover of my soul,</q> and <q>Come,
Holy Spirit, heavenly Dove!</q> On the personality of the Holy Spirit, see John Owen,
in Works, 3:64-92; Dick, Lectures on Theology, 1:341-350.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. This Tripersonality of the Divine Nature is not merely
economic and temporal, but is immanent and eternal.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Scripture proof that these distinctions of personality are eternal.</head>

<p>
We prove this (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) from those passages which speak of the existence of
the Word from eternity with the Father; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) from passages asserting or
implying Christ's preëxistence; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) from passages implying intercourse
between the Father and the Son before the foundation of the world;
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) from passages asserting the creation of the world by Christ; (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) from
passages asserting or implying the eternity of the Holy Spirit.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <emph>John 1:1, 2&mdash;<q>In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Gen.
1:1&mdash;<q>In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth</q></emph>; <emph>Phil. 2:6&mdash;<q>existing in the form of God ... on an
equality with God.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <emph>John 8:58&mdash;<q>before Abraham was born, I am</q></emph>; <emph>1:18&mdash;<q>the only begotten Son, who is in
the bosom of the Father</q></emph> (R. V.); <emph>Col. 1:15-17&mdash;<q>firstborn of all creation</q></emph> or <emph><q>before every creature ... he is
before all things.</q></emph> In these passages <q><emph>am</emph></q> and <q><emph>is</emph></q> indicate an eternal fact; the present
tense expresses permanent being. <emph>Rev. 22:13, 14&mdash;<q>I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the
beginning and the end.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) <emph>John 17:5&mdash;<q>Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had
with thee before the world was</q></emph>; <emph>24&mdash;<q>Thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) <emph>John 1:3&mdash;<q>All
things were made through him</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 8:6&mdash;<q>one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things</q></emph>; <emph>Col. 1:16&mdash;<q>all
things have been created through him and unto him</q></emph>; <emph>Heb. 1:2&mdash;<q>through whom also he made the worlds</q></emph>;
<emph>10&mdash;<q>Thou, Lord, in the beginning didst lay the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy hands.</q></emph>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) <emph>Gen. 1:2&mdash;<q>the Spirit of God was brooding</q></emph>&mdash;existed therefore before creation; <emph>Ps. 33:6&mdash;<q rend='pre'>by the
word of Jehovah were the heavens made; and all the host of them by the breath</q></emph> [Spirit] <emph><q rend='post'>of his mouth</q></emph>; <emph>Heb. 9:14&mdash;<q>through
the eternal Spirit.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
With these passages before us, we must dissent from the statement of Dr. E. G. Robinson:
<q>About the ontologic Trinity we know absolutely nothing. The Trinity we can
contemplate is simply a revealed one, one of economic manifestations. We may <emph>suppose</emph>
that the ontologic underlies the economic.</q> Scripture compels us, in our judgment,
to go further than this, and to maintain that there are personal relations between the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit independently of creation and of time; in other
words we maintain that Scripture reveals to us a social Trinity and an intercourse of
love apart from and before the existence of the universe. Love before time implies
distinctions of personality before time. There are three eternal consciousnesses and
three eternal wills in the divine nature. We here state only the fact,&mdash;the explanation
of it, and its reconciliation with the fundamental unity of God is treated in our next
section. We now proceed to show that the two varying systems which ignore this tripersonality
are unscriptural and at the same time exposed to philosophical objection.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Errors refuted by the foregoing passages.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. The Sabellian.</head>

<p>
Sabellius (of Ptolemais in Pentapolis, 250) held that Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit are mere developments or revelations to creatures, in time,
of the otherwise concealed Godhead&mdash;developments which, since creatures
will always exist, are not transitory, but which at the same time are not
eternal <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a parte ante</foreign>. God as united to the creation is Father; God as united
to Jesus Christ is Son; God as united to the church is Holy Spirit. The
Trinity of Sabellius is therefore an economic and not an immanent Trinity&mdash;a
Trinity of forms or manifestations, but not a necessary and eternal
Trinity in the divine nature.
</p>

<p>
Some have interpreted Sabellius as denying that the Trinity is eternal <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a
parte post</foreign>, as well as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a parte ante</foreign>, and as holding that, when the purpose
of these temporary manifestations is accomplished, the Triad is resolved
into the Monad. This view easily merges in another, which makes the
persons of the Trinity mere names for the ever shifting phases of the
divine activity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The best statement of the Sabellian doctrine, according to the interpretation first
mentioned, is that of Schleiermacher, translated with comments by Moses Stuart, in
Biblical Repository, 6:1-16. The one unchanging God is differently reflected from the
world on account of the world's different receptivities. Praxeas of Rome (200)
Noetus of Smyrna (230), and Beryl of Arabia (250) advocated substantially the same
views. They were called Monarchians (μόνη ἀρχή), because they believed not in the
Triad, but only in the Monad. They were called Patripassians, because they held that,
as Christ is only God in human form, and this God suffers, therefore the Father suffers.
Knight, Colloquia Peripatetica, xlii, suggests a connection between Sabellianism and
Emanationism. See this Compendium, on Theories which oppose Creation.
</p>

<p>
A view similar to that of Sabellius was held by Horace Bushnell, in his God in Christ,
113-115, 130 sq., 172-175, and Christ in Theology, 119, 120&mdash;<q>Father, Son and Holy Spirit,
being incidental to the revelation of God, may be and probably are from eternity to
eternity, inasmuch as God may have revealed himself from eternity, and certainly will
reveal himself so long as there are minds to know him. It may be, in fact, the nature
of God to reveal himself, as truly as it is of the sun to shine or of living mind to think.</q>
He does not deny the immanent Trinity, but simply says we know nothing about it.
Yet a Trinity of Persons in the divine essence itself he called plain tritheism. He prefers
<q>instrumental Trinity</q> to <q>modal Trinity</q> as a designation of his doctrine. The difference
between Bushnell on the one hand, and Sabellius and Schleiermacher on the
other, seems then to be the following: Sabellius and Schleiermacher hold that the One
<emph>becomes</emph> three in the process of revelation, and the three are only <emph>media</emph> or <emph>modes</emph> of
revelation. Father, Son, and Spirit are mere names applied to these modes of the divine
action, there being no internal distinctions in the divine nature. This is modalism, or a
modal Trinity. Bushnell stands by the Trinity of revelation alone, and protests against
any constructive reasonings with regard to the immanent Trinity. Yet in his later
writings he reverts to Athanasius and speaks of God as eternally <q>threeing himself</q>;
see Fisher, Edwards on the Trinity, 73.
</p>

<p>
Lyman Abbott, in The Outlook, proposes as illustration of the Trinity, 1. the artist
working on his pictures; 2. the same man teaching pupils how to paint; 3. the same
man entertaining his friends at home. He has not taken on these types of conduct.
They are not masks (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>personæ</foreign>), nor offices, which he takes up and lays down. There is
a threefold <emph>nature</emph> in him: he is artist, teacher, friend. God is complex, and not simple.
I do not know him, till I know him in all these relations. Yet it is evident that Dr.
Abbott's view provides no basis for love or for society within the divine nature. The
three persons are but three successive aspects or activities of the one God. General
Grant, when in office, was but one person, even though he was a father, a President,
and a commander in chief of the army and navy of the United States.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>

<p>
It is evident that this theory, in whatever form it may be held, is far
from satisfying the demands of Scripture. Scripture speaks of the second
person of the Trinity as existing and acting before the birth of Jesus
Christ, and of the Holy Spirit as existing and acting before the formation
of the church. Both have a personal existence, eternal in the past as well
as in the future&mdash;which this theory expressly denies.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
A revelation that is not a self-revelation of God is not honest. Stuart: Since God
is revealed as three, he must be essentially or immanently three, back of revelation;
else the revelation would not be true. Dorner: A Trinity of revelation is a misrepresentation,
if there is not behind it a Trinity of nature. Twesten properly arrives at the
threeness by considering, not so much what is involved in the revelation of God to us, as
what is involved in the revelation of God to himself. The unscripturalness of the Sabellian
doctrine is plain, if we remember that upon this view the Three cannot exist at
once: when the Father says <emph><q>Thou art my beloved Son</q> (Luke 3:22)</emph>, he is simply speaking to
himself; when Christ sends the Holy Spirit, he only sends himself. <emph>John 1:1&mdash;<q>In the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God</q></emph>&mdash;<q>sets aside the false notion that
the Word become <emph>personal</emph> first at the time of creation, or at the incarnation</q> (Westcott,
Bib. Com. <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 50, 51&mdash;<q>Sabellius claimed that the Unity became a Trinity
by expansion. Fatherhood began with the world. God is not eternally Father, nor
does he love eternally. We have only an impersonal, unintelligible God, who has
played upon us and confused our understanding by showing himself to us under three
disguises. Before creation there is no Fatherhood, even in germ.</q>
</p>

<p>
According to Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 2:269, Origen held that the Godhead might
be represented by three concentric circles; the widest, embracing the whole being, is
that of the Father; the next, that of the Son, which extends to the rational creation;
and the narrowest is that of the Spirit, who rules in the holy men of the church. King,
Reconstruction of Theology, 192, 194&mdash;<q>To affirm social relations in the Godhead is to
assert absolute Tritheism.... Unitarianism emphasizes the humanity of Christ, to
preserve the unity of God; the true view emphasizes the divinity of Christ, to preserve
the unity.</q>
</p>

<p>
L. L. Paine, Evolution of Trinitarianism, 141, 287, says that New England Trinitarianism
is characterized by three things: 1. Sabellian Patripassianism; Christ is all the
Father there is, and the Holy Spirit is Christ's continued life; 2. Consubstantiality, or
community of essence, of God and man; unlike the essential difference between the
created and the uncreated which Platonic dualism maintained, this theory turns <emph>moral</emph>
likeness into <emph>essential</emph> likeness; 3. Philosophical monism, matter itself being but an
evolution of Spirit.... In the next form of the scientific doctrine of evolution, the
divineness of man becomes a vital truth, and out of it arises a Christology that removes
Jesus of Nazareth indeed out of the order of absolute Deity, but at the same time exalts
him to a place of moral eminence that is secure and supreme.
</p>

<p>
Against this danger of regarding Christ as a merely economic and temporary manifestation
of God we can guard only by maintaining the Scriptural doctrine of an immanent
Trinity. Moberly, Atonement and Personality, 86, 165&mdash;<q>We cannot incur any
Sabellian peril while we maintain&mdash;what is fatal to Sabellianism&mdash;that that which is
revealed within the divine Unity is not only a distinction of aspects or of names, but a
real reciprocity of mutual relation. One <q>aspect</q> cannot contemplate, or be loved by,
another.... Sabellianism degrades the persons of Deity into aspects. But there
can be no mutual relation between aspects. The heat and the light of flame cannot
severally contemplate and be in love with one another.</q> See Bushnell's doctrine
reviewed by Hodge, Essays and Reviews, 433-473. On the whole subject, see Dorner,
Hist. Doct. Person of Christ, 2:152-169; Shedd, Hist. Doctrine, 1:259; Baur, Lehre von
der Dreieinigkeit, 1:256-305; Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk 1:83.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. The Arian.</head>

<p>
Arius (of Alexandria; condemned by Council of Nice, 325) held that
the Father is the only divine being absolutely without beginning; the Son
and the Holy Spirit, through whom God creates and recreates, having been
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
themselves created out of nothing before the world was; and Christ being
called God, because he is next in rank to God, and is endowed by God
with divine power to create.
</p>

<p>
The followers of Arius have differed as to the precise rank and claims of
Christ. While Socinus held with Arius that worship of Christ was obligatory,
the later Unitarians have perceived the impropriety of worshiping
even the highest of created beings, and have constantly tended to a view of
the Redeemer which regards him as a mere man, standing in a peculiarly
intimate relation to God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
For statement of the Arian doctrine, see J. Freeman Clarke, Orthodoxy, Its Truths
and Errors. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Schäffer, in Bib. Sac., 21:1, article on Athanasius and the
Arian controversy. The so-called Athanasian Creed, which Athanasius never wrote,
is more properly designated as the <hi rend='italic'>Symbolum Quicumque</hi>. It has also been called,
though facetiously, <q>the Anathemasian Creed.</q> Yet no error in doctrine can be more
perilous or worthy of condemnation than the error of Arius (<emph>1 Cor. 16:22&mdash;<q>If any man
loveth not the Lord, let him be anathema</q></emph>; <emph>1 John 2:23&mdash;<q>Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father</q></emph>;
<emph>4:3&mdash;<q>every spirit that confesseth not Jesus is not of God: and this is the spirit of the antichrist</q></emph>). It regards
Christ as called God only by courtesy, much as we give to a Lieutenant Governor the
title of Governor. Before the creation of the Son, the love of God, if there could be
love, was expended on himself. Gwatkin, Studies of Arianism: <q>The Arian Christ is
nothing but a heathen idol, invented to maintain a heathenish Supreme in heathen isolation
from the world. The nearer the Son is pulled down towards man by the attenuation
of his Godhead, the more remote from man becomes the unshared Godhead of
the Father. You have an <foreign rend='italic'>Être Suprême</foreign> who is practically unapproachable, a mere One-and-all,
destitute of personality.</q>
</p>

<p>
Gore, Incarnation, 90, 91, 110, shows the immense importance of the controversy
with regard to ὁμοούσιον and ὁμοιούσιον. Carlyle once sneered that <q>the Christian world
was torn in pieces over a diphthong.</q> But Carlyle afterwards came to see that Christianity
itself was at stake, and that it would have dwindled away to a legend, if the
Arians had won. Arius appealed chiefly to logic, not to Scripture. He claimed that a
Son must be younger than his Father. But he was asserting the principle of heathenism
and idolatry, in demanding worship for a creature. The Goths were easily converted
to Arianism. Christ was to them a hero-god, a demigod, and the later Goths could
worship Christ and heathen idols impartially.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It is evident that the theory of Arius does not satisfy the demands of
Scripture. A created God, a God whose existence had a beginning and
therefore may come to an end, a God made of a substance which once was
not, and therefore a substance different from that of the Father, is not God,
but a finite creature. But the Scripture speaks of Christ as being in the
beginning God, with God, and equal with God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Luther, alluding to <emph>John 1:1</emph>, says: <q><emph><q>The Word was God</q></emph> is against Arius; <emph><q>the Word was with
God</q></emph> is against Sabellius.</q> The Racovian Catechism, Quaes. 183, 184, 211, 236, 237, 245, 246,
teaches that Christ is to be truly worshiped, and they are denied to be Christians who
refuse to adore him. Davidis was persecuted and died in prison for refusing to worship
Christ; and Socinus was charged, though probably unjustly, with having caused his
imprisonment. Bartholomew Legate, an Essexman and an Arian, was burned to death
at Smithfield, March 13, 1613. King James I asked him whether he did not pray to
Christ. Legate's answer was that <q>indeed he had prayed to Christ in the days of his
ignorance, but not for these last seven years</q>; which so shocked James that <q>he
spurned at him with his foot.</q> At the stake Legate still refused to recant, and so was
burned to ashes amid a vast conflux of people. The very next month another Arian
named Whiteman was burned at Burton-on-Trent.
</p>

<p>
It required courage, even a generation later, for John Milton, in his Christian Doctrine,
to declare himself a high Arian. In that treatise he teaches that <q>the Son of God
did not exist from all eternity, is not coëval or coëssential or coëqual with the Father,
but came into existence by the will of God to be the next being to himself, the first-born
and best beloved, the Logos or Word through whom all creation should take its beginnings.</q>
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
So Milton regards the Holy Spirit as a created being, inferior to the Son and
possibly confined to our heavens and earth. Milton's Arianism, however, is characteristic
of his later, rather than his earlier, writings; compare the Ode on Christ's Nativity
with Paradise Lost, 3:383-391; and see Masson's Life of Milton, 1:39; 6:823, 824; A. H.
Strong, Great Poets and their Theology, 260-262.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Samuel Clarke, when asked whether the Father who had created could not also
destroy the Son, said that he had not considered the question. Ralph Waldo Emerson
broke with his church and left the ministry because he could not celebrate the Lord's
Supper,&mdash;it implied a profounder reverence for Jesus than he could give him. He
wrote: <q>It seemed to me at church to-day, that the Communion Service, as it is now
and here celebrated, is a document of the dullness of the race. How these, my good
neighbors, the bending deacons, with their cups and plates, would have straightened
themselves to sturdiness, if the proposition came before them to honor thus a fellow-man</q>;
see Cabot's Memoir, 314. Yet Dr. Leonard Bacon said of the Unitarians that
<q>it seemed as if their exclusive contemplation of Jesus Christ in his human character
as the example for our imitation had wrought in them an exceptional beauty and
Christlikeness of living.</q>
</p>

<p>
Chadwick, Old and New Unitarian Belief, 20, speaks of Arianism as exalting Christ to
a degree of inappreciable difference from God, while Socinus looked upon him only as
a miraculously endowed man, and believed in an infallible book. The term <q>Unitarians,</q>
he claims, is derived from the <q>Uniti,</q> a society in Transylvania, in support
of mutual toleration between Calvinists, Romanists, and Socinians. The name stuck
to the advocates of the divine Unity, because they were its most active members.
B. W. Lockhart: <q>Trinity guarantees God's knowableness. Arius taught that Jesus
was neither human nor divine, but created in some grade of being between the two,
essentially unknown to man. An absentee God made Jesus his messenger, God himself
not touching the world directly at any point, and unknown and unknowable to it.
Athanasius on the contrary asserted that God did not send a messenger in Christ, but
came himself, so that to know Christ is really to know God who is essentially revealed
in him. This gave the Church the doctrine of God immanent, or Immanuel, God knowable
and actually known by men, because actually present.</q> Chapman, Jesus Christ
and the Present Age, 14&mdash;<q>The world was never further from Unitarianism than it is
to-day; we may add that Unitarianism was never further from itself.</q> On the doctrines
of the early Socinians, see Princeton Essays, 1:195. On the whole subject, see
Blunt, Dict. of Heretical Sects, art.: Arius; Guericke, Hist. Doctrine, 1:313, 319. See
also a further account of Arianism in the chapter of this Compendium on the Person of
Christ.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. This Tripersonality is not Tritheism; for, while there are
three Persons, there is but one Essence.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The term <q>person</q> only approximately represents the truth.
Although this word, more nearly than any other single word, expresses
the conception which the Scriptures give us of the relation between the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, it is not itself used in this connection
in Scripture, and we employ it in a qualified sense, not in the ordinary
sense in which we apply the word <q>person</q> to Peter, Paul, and John.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The word <q>person</q> is only the imperfect and inadequate expression of a fact that
transcends our experience and comprehension. Bunyan: <q>My dark and cloudy words,
they do but hold The truth, as cabinets encase the gold.</q> Three Gods, limiting each
other, would deprive each other of Deity. While we show that the unity is articulated
by the persons, it is equally important to remember that the persons are limited by the
unity. With us personality implies entire separation from all others&mdash;distinct individuality.
But in the one God there can be no such separation. The personal distinctions
in him must be such as are consistent with essential unity. This is the merit of
the statement in the <hi rend='italic'>Symbolum Quicumque</hi> (or Athanasian Creed, wrongly so called):
<q>The Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy Ghost is God; and yet there are not three
Gods but one God. So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son is Lord, the Holy Ghost is
Lord; yet there are not three Lords but one Lord. For as we are compelled by
Christian truth to acknowledge each person by himself to be God and Lord, so we are
forbidden by the same truth to say that there are three Gods or three Lords.</q> See
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
Hagenbach, History of Doctrine, 1:270. We add that the personality of the Godhead
as a whole is separate and distinct from all others, and in this respect is more fully analogous
to man's personality than is the personality of the Father or of the Son.
</p>

<p>
The church of Alexandria in the second century chanted together: <q>One only is
holy, the Father; One only is holy, the Son; One only is holy, the Spirit.</q> Moberly,
Atonement and Personality, 154, 167, 168&mdash;<q>The three persons are neither three Gods,
nor three parts of God. Rather are they God threefoldly, tri-personally.... The personal
distinction in Godhead is a distinction within, and of, Unity: not a distinction
which qualifies Unity, or usurps the place of it, or destroys it. It is not a relation of
mutual exclusiveness, but of mutual inclusiveness. No one person is or can be without
the others.... The personality of the supreme or absolute Being cannot be without
self-contained mutuality of relations such as Will and Love. But the mutuality
would not be real, unless the subject which becomes object, and the object which
becomes subject, were on each side alike and equally Personal.... The Unity of all-comprehending
inclusiveness is a higher mode of unity than the unity of singular
distinctiveness.... The disciples are not to have the presence of the Spirit instead of
the Son, but to have the Spirit is to have the Son. We mean by the Personal God not
a limited alternative to unlimited abstracts, such as Law, Holiness, Love, but the transcendent
and inclusive completeness of them all. The terms Father and Son are certainly
terms which rise more immediately out of the temporal facts of the incarnation
than out of the eternal relations of the divine Being. They are metaphors, however,
which mean far more in the spiritual than they do in the material sphere. Spiritual
hunger is more intense than physical hunger. So sin, judgment, grace, are metaphors.
But in <emph>John 1:1-18</emph> <q>Son</q> is not used, but <q>Word.</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The necessary qualification is that, while three persons among men
have only a <emph>specific</emph> unity of nature or essence&mdash;that is, have the same
<emph>species</emph> of nature or essence,&mdash;the persons of the Godhead have a <emph>numerical</emph>
unity of nature or essence&mdash;that is, have the <emph>same</emph> nature or essence.
The undivided essence of the Godhead belongs equally to each of the persons;
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, each possesses all the substance and
all the attributes of Deity. The plurality of the Godhead is therefore not
a plurality of essence, but a plurality of hypostatical, or personal, distinctions.
God is not three and one, but three in one. The one indivisible
essence has three modes of subsistence.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Trinity is not simply a partnership, in which each member can sign the name of
the firm; for this is unity of council and operation only, not of essence. God's nature
is not an abstract but an organic unity. God, as living, cannot be a mere Monad. Trinity
is the organism of the Deity. The one divine Being exists in three modes. The life
of the vine makes itself known in the life of the branches, and this union between vine
and branches Christ uses to illustrate the union between the Father and himself. (See
<emph>John 15:10&mdash;<q>If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments,
and abide in his love</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>verse 5&mdash;<q>I am the vine, ye are the branches; he that abideth in me, and I in him,
the same beareth much fruit</q></emph>; <emph>17:22, 23&mdash;<q>That they may be one, even as we are one; I in them, and thou in me.</q></emph>)
So, in the organism of the body, the arm has its own life, a different life from that of
the head or the foot, yet has this only by partaking of the life of the whole. See Dorner,
System of Doctrine, 1:450-453&mdash;<q>The one divine personality is so present in each of the
distinctions, that these, which singly and by themselves would not be personal, yet do
participate in the one divine personality, each in its own manner. This one divine personality
is the unity of the three modes of subsistence which participate in itself.
Neither is personal without the others. In each, in its manner, is the whole Godhead.</q>
</p>

<p>
The human body is a complex rather than a simple organism, a unity which embraces
an indefinite number of subsidiary and dependent organisms. The one life of the body
manifests itself in the life of the nervous system, the life of the circulatory system,
and the life of the digestive system. The complete destruction of either one of these
systems destroys the other two. Psychology as well as physiology reveals to us the
possibility of a three-fold life within the bounds of a single being. In the individual
man there is sometimes a double and even a triple consciousness. Herbert Spencer,
Autobiography, 1:459; 2:204&mdash;<q>Most active minds have, I presume, more or less frequent
experiences of double consciousness&mdash;one consciousness seeming to take note
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
of what the other is about, and to applaud or blame.</q> He mentions an instance in
his own experience. <q>May there not be possible a bi-cerebral thinking, as there is a
binocular vision?... In these cases it seems as though there were going on, quite apart
from the consciousness which seemed to constitute myself, some process of elaborating
coherent thoughts&mdash;as though one part of myself was an independent originator over
whose sayings and doings I had no control, and which were nevertheless in great
measure consistent; while the other part of myself was a passive spectator or listener,
quite unprepared for many of the things that the first part said, and which were
nevertheless, though unexpected, not illogical.</q> This fact that there can be more
than one consciousness in the same personality among men should make us slow to
deny that there can be three consciousnesses in the one God.
</p>

<p>
Humanity at large is also an organism, and this fact lends new confirmation to the
Pauline statement of organic interdependence. Modern sociology is the doctrine of
one life constituted by the union of many. <q>Unus homo, nullus homo</q> is a principle
of ethics as well as of sociology. No man can have a conscience to himself. The moral
life of one results from and is interpenetrated by the moral life of all. All men
moreover live, move and have their being in God. Within the bounds of the one universal
and divine consciousness there are multitudinous <emph>finite</emph> consciousnesses. Why
then should it be thought incredible that in the nature of this one God there should
be three <emph>infinite</emph> consciousnesses? Baldwin, Psychology, 53, 54&mdash;<q>The integration of
finite consciousnesses in an all-embracing divine consciousness may find a valid analogy
in the integration of subordinate consciousnesses in the unit-personality of man. In the
hypnotic state, multiple consciousnesses may be induced in the same nervous organism.
In insanity there is a secondary consciousness at war with that which normally dominates.</q>
Schurman, Belief in God, 26, 161&mdash;<q>The infinite Spirit may include the finite,
as the idea of a single organism embraces within a single life a plurality of members
and functions.... All souls are parts or functions of the eternal life of God, who is
above all, and through all, and in all, and in whom we live, and move, and have our
being.</q> We would draw the conclusion that, as in the body and soul of man, both as
an individual and as a race, there is diversity in unity, so in the God in whose image
man is made, there is diversity in unity, and a triple consciousness and will are consistent
with, and even find their perfection in, a single essence.
</p>

<p>
By the personality of God we mean more than we mean when we speak of the personality
of the Son and the personality of the Spirit. The personality of the Godhead
is distinct and separate from all others, and is, in this respect, like that of man. Hence
Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:194, says <q>it is preferable to speak of the <emph>personality</emph> of the
essence rather than of the <emph>person</emph> of the essence; because the essence is not one person,
but three persons.... The divine essence cannot be at once three persons and one person,
if <q>person</q> is employed in one signification; but it can be at once three persons and
one personal Being.</q> While we speak of the one God as having a personality in which
there are three persons, we would not call this personality a superpersonality, if this
latter term is intended to intimate that God's personality is less than the personality
of man. The personality of the Godhead is inclusive rather than exclusive.
</p>

<p>
With this qualification we may assent to the words of D'Arcy, Idealism and Theology,
93, 94, 218, 230, 236, 254&mdash;<q>The innermost truth of things, God, must be conceived as
personal; but the ultimate Unity, which is his, must be believed to be superpersonal.
It is a unity of persons, not a personal unity. For us personality is the ultimate form
of unity. It is not so in him. For in him all persons live and move and have their
being.... God is personal and also superpersonal. In him there is a transcendent
unity that can embrace a personal multiplicity.... There is in God an ultimate
superpersonal unity in which all persons are one&mdash;[all human persons and the three
divine persons].... Substance is more real than quality, and subject is more real
than substance. The most real of all is the concrete totality, the all-inclusive Universal....
What human love strives to accomplish&mdash;the overcoming of the opposition of
person to person&mdash;is perfectly attained in the divine Unity.... The presupposition
on which philosophy is driven back&mdash;[that persons have an underlying ground of
unity] is identical with that which underlies Christian theology.</q> See Pfleiderer and
Lotze on personality, in this Compendium, p. 104.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) This oneness of essence explains the fact that, while Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, as respects their personality, are distinct subsistences, there is
an intercommunion of persons and an immanence of one divine person in
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
another which permits the peculiar work of one to be ascribed, with a single
limitation, to either of the others, and the manifestation of one to be
recognized in the manifestation of another. The limitation is simply this,
that although the Son was sent by the Father, and the Spirit by the Father
and the Son, it cannot be said <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi> that the Father is sent either by
the Son, or by the Spirit. The Scripture representations of this intercommunion
prevent us from conceiving of the distinctions called Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit as involving separation between them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Dorner adds that <q>in one is each of the others.</q> This is true with the limitation
mentioned in the text above. Whatever Christ does, God the Father can be said to do;
for God acts only in and through Christ the Revealer. Whatever the Holy Spirit does,
Christ can be said to do; for the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of Christ. The Spirit is the
omnipresent Jesus, and Bengel's dictum is true: <q>Ubi Spiritus, ibi Christus.</q> Passages
illustrating this intercommunion are the following: <emph>Gen. 1:1&mdash;<q>God created</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Heb. 1:2&mdash;<q rend='pre'>through
whom</q></emph> [the Son] <emph><q rend='post'>also he made the worlds</q></emph>; <emph>John 5:17, 19&mdash;<q>My Father worketh even until now, and I
work.... The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father doing; for what things soever he doeth,
these the Son also doeth in like manner</q></emph>; <emph>14:9&mdash;<q>he that hath seen me hath seen the Father</q></emph>; <emph>11&mdash;<q>I am in the
Father and the Father in me</q></emph>; <emph>18&mdash;<q>I will not leave you desolate: I come unto you</q></emph> (by the Holy Spirit);
<emph>15:26&mdash;<q>when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth</q></emph>; <emph>17:21&mdash;<q>that
they may all be one; even as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee</q></emph>; <emph>2 Cor. 5:19&mdash;<q>God was in Christ
reconciling</q></emph>; <emph>Titus 2:10&mdash;<q>God our Savior</q></emph>; <emph>Heb. 12:23&mdash;<q>God the Judge of all</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>John 5:22&mdash;<q>neither
doth the father judge any man, but he hath given all judgment unto the Son</q></emph>; <emph>Acts 17:31&mdash;<q>judge the world in
righteousness by the man whom he hath ordained.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
It is this intercommunion, together with the order of personality and operation to be
mentioned hereafter, which explains the occasional use of the term <q>Father</q> for the
whole Godhead; as in <emph>Eph. 4:6&mdash;<q rend='pre'>one God and Father of all, who is over all through all</q></emph> [in Christ],
<emph><q rend='post'>and in you all</q></emph> [by the Spirit]. This intercommunion also explains the designation of
Christ as <q><emph>the Spirit</emph>,</q> and of the Spirit as <q><emph>the Spirit of Christ</emph>,</q> as in <emph>1 Cor. 15:45&mdash;<q>the last Adam became
a life-giving Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>2 Cor. 3:17&mdash;<q>Now the Lord is the Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>Gal. 4:6&mdash;<q>sent forth the Spirit of his Son</q></emph>; <emph>Phil.
1:19&mdash;<q>supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ</q></emph> (see Alford and Lange on <emph>2 Cor. 3:17, 18</emph>). So the Lamb,
in <emph>Rev. 5:6</emph>, has <q><emph>seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth</emph></q> = the
Holy Spirit, with his manifold powers, is the Spirit of the omnipotent, omniscient, and
omnipresent Christ. Theologians have designated this intercommunion by the terms
περιχώρησις, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>circumincessio</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>intercommunicatio</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>circulatio</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inexistentia</foreign>. The word οὐσία
was used to denote essence, substance, nature, being; and the words πρόσωπον and
ὑπόστασις for person, distinction, mode of subsistence. On the changing uses of the
words πρόσωπον and ὑπόστασις see Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:321, note 2. On the meaning
of the word 'person' in connection with the Trinity, see John Howe, Calm Discourse
of the Trinity; Jonathan Edwards, Observations on the Trinity; Shedd, Dogm. Theol.,
1:194, 267-275, 299, 300.
</p>

<p>
The Holy Spirit is Christ's <emph>alter ego</emph>, or other self. When Jesus went away, it was an
exchange of his presence for his omnipresence; an exchange of limited for unlimited
power; an exchange of companionship for indwelling. Since Christ comes to men in
the Holy Spirit, he speaks through the apostles as authoritatively as if his own lips
uttered the words. Each believer, in having the Holy Spirit, has the whole Christ for
his own; see A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit. Gore, Incarnation, 218&mdash;<q>The persons
of the Holy Trinity are not separable individuals. Each involves the others; the
coming of each is the coming of the others. Thus the coming of the Spirit must have
involved the coming of the Son. But the specialty of the Pentecostal gift appears to
be the coming of the Holy Spirit out of the uplifted and glorified <emph>manhood</emph> of the
incarnate Son. The Spirit is the life-giver, but the life with which he works in the
church is the life of the <emph>Incarnate</emph>, the life of Jesus.</q>
</p>

<p>
Moberly, Atonement and Personality, 85&mdash;<q>For centuries upon centuries, the essential
unity of God had been burnt and branded in upon the consciousness of Israel. It
had to be completely established first, as a basal element of thought, indispensable,
unalterable, before there could begin the disclosure to man of the reality of the eternal
relations within the one indivisible being of God. And when the disclosure came,
it came not as modifying, but as further interpreting and illumining, that unity which
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
it absolutely presupposed.</q> E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 238&mdash;<q>There is extreme
difficulty in giving any statement of a triunity that shall not verge upon tritheism on
the one hand, or upon mere modalism on the other. It was very natural that Calvin
should be charged with Sabellianism, and John Howe with tritheism.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>V. The Three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are equal.</head>

<p>
In explanation, notice that:
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. These titles belong to the Persons.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The Father is not God as such; for God is not only Father, but
also Son and Holy Spirit. The term <q>Father</q> designates that hypostatical
distinction in the divine nature in virtue of which God is related to the
Son, and through the Son and the Spirit to the church and the world. As
author of the believer's spiritual as well as natural life, God is doubly his
Father; but this relation which God sustains to creatures is not the ground
of the title. God is Father primarily in virtue of the relation which he
sustains to the eternal Son; only as we are spiritually united to Jesus
Christ do we become children of God.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The Son is not God as such; for God is not only Son, but also
Father and Holy Spirit. <q>The Son</q> designates that distinction in virtue
of which God is related to the Father, is sent by the Father to redeem the
world, and with the Father sends the Holy Spirit.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The Holy Spirit is not God as such; for God is not only Holy Spirit,
but also Father and Son. <q>The Holy Spirit</q> designates that distinction in
virtue of which God is related to the Father and the Son, and is sent by
them to accomplish the work of renewing the ungodly and of sanctifying
the church.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Neither of these names designates the Monad as such. Each designates rather that
personal distinction which forms the eternal basis and ground for a particular self-revelation.
In the sense of being the Author and Provider of men's natural life, God
is the Father of all. But even this natural sonship is mediated by Jesus Christ; see
<emph>1 Cor. 8:6&mdash;<q>one Lord, Jesus Christ through whom are all things, and we through him.</q></emph> The phrase <q><emph>Our Father</emph>,</q>
however, can be used with the highest truth only by the regenerate, who have been
newly born of God by being united to Christ through the power of the Holy Spirit.
See <emph>Gal. 3:26&mdash;<q>For ye are all sons of God, through faith, in Jesus Christ</q></emph>; <emph>4:4-6&mdash;<q>God sent forth his Son ...
that we might receive the adoption of sons ... sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father</q></emph>; <emph>Eph.
1:5&mdash;<q>foreordained as unto adoption as sons through Jesus Christ.</q></emph> God's love for Christ is the measure
of his love for those who are one with Christ. Human nature in Christ is lifted up into
the life and communion of the eternal Trinity. Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:306-310.
</p>

<p>
Human fatherhood is a reflection of the divine, not, <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>, the divine a reflection
of the human; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Eph. 3:14, 15&mdash;<q rend='pre'>the Father, from whom every fatherhood</q></emph> πατριά <emph><q rend='post'>in heaven and on earth is
named.</q></emph> Chadwick, Unitarianism, 77-83, makes the name <q>Father</q> only a symbol for
the great Cause of organic evolution, the Author of all being. But we may reply with
Stearns, Evidence of Christian Experience, 177&mdash;<q>to know God outside of the sphere
of redemption is not to know him in the deeper meaning of the term <q>Father</q>. It is
only through the Son that we know the Father: <emph>Mat. 11:27&mdash;<q>Neither doth any know the Father,
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son willeth to reveal him.</q></emph></q>
</p>

<p>
Whiton, Gloria Patri, 38&mdash;<q>The Unseen can be known only by the seen which comes
forth from it. The all-generating or Paternal Life which is hidden from us can be
known only by the generated or Filial Life in which it reveals itself. The goodness
and righteousness which inhabits eternity can be known only by the goodness and
righteousness which issues from it in the successive births of time. God above the
world is made known only by God in the world. God transcendent, the Father, is
revealed by God immanent, the Son.</q> Faber: <q>O marvellous, O worshipful! No song
or sound is heard, But everywhere and every hour, In love, in wisdom and in power,
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
the Father speaks his dear eternal Word.</q> We may interpret this as meaning that self-expression
is a necessity of nature to an infinite Mind. The Word is therefore eternal.
Christ is the mirror from which are flashed upon us the rays of the hidden Luminary.
So Principal Fairbairn says: <q>Theology must be on its historical side Christocentric,
but on its doctrinal side Theocentric.</q>
</p>

<p>
Salmond, Expositor's Greek Testament, on <emph>Eph. 1:5</emph>&mdash;<q>By <emph><q>adoption</q></emph> Paul does not mean
the bestowal of the full privileges of the family on those who are sons by nature, but
the acceptance into the family of those who are not sons originally and by right in the
relation proper of those who are sons by birth. Hence υἱοθεσία is never affirmed of
Christ, for he alone is Son of God by nature. So Paul regards our sonship, not as lying
in the natural relation in which men stand to God as his children, but as implying a
new relation of grace, founded on a covenant relation of God and on the work of Christ
(<emph>Gal. 4:5</emph> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. Qualified sense of these titles.</head>

<p>
Like the word <q>person</q>, the names Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are not
to be confined within the precise limitations of meaning which would be
required if they were applied to men.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The Scriptures enlarge our conceptions of Christ's Sonship by
giving to him in his preëxistent state the names of the Logos, the Image,
and the Effulgence of God.&mdash;The term <q>Logos</q> combines in itself the two
ideas of thought and word, of reason and expression. While the Logos as
divine thought or reason is one with God, the Logos as divine word or
expression is distinguishable from God. Words are the means by which
personal beings express or reveal themselves. Since Jesus Christ was <q>the
Word</q> before there were any creatures to whom revelations could be made,
it would seem to be only a necessary inference from this title that in Christ
God must be from eternity expressed or revealed to himself; in other
words, that the Logos is the principle of truth, or self-consciousness, in
God.&mdash;The term <q>Image</q> suggests the ideas of copy or counterpart. Man
is the image of God only relatively and derivatively. Christ is the Image
of God absolutely and archetypally. As the perfect representation of the
Father's perfections, the Son would seem to be the object and principle of
love in the Godhead.&mdash;The term <q>Effulgence,</q> finally, is an allusion to the
sun and its radiance. As the effulgence of the sun manifests the sun's
nature, which otherwise would be unrevealed, yet is inseparable from
the sun and ever one with it, so Christ reveals God, but is eternally one
with God. Here is a principle of movement, of will, which seems to connect
itself with the holiness, or self-asserting purity, of the divine nature.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Smyth, Introd. to Edwards' Observations on the Trinity: <q>The ontological relations
of the persons of the Trinity are not a mere blank to human thought.</q> <emph>John 1:1&mdash;<q>In the
beginning was the Word</q></emph>&mdash;means more than <q>in the beginning was the <hi rend='italic'>x</hi>, or the zero.</q> Godet
indeed says that Logos = <q>reason</q> only in philosophical writings, but never in the
Scriptures. He calls this a Hegelian notion. But both Plato and Philo had made this
signification a common one. On λόγος as = reason + speech, see Lightfoot on Colossians,
143, 144. Meyer interprets it as <q>personal subsistence, the self-revelation of the
divine essence, before all time immanent in God.</q> Neander, Planting and Training,
369&mdash;Logos = <q>the eternal Revealer of the divine essence.</q> Bushnell: <q>Mirror of
creative imagination</q>; <q>form of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
Word = 1. Expression; 2. Definite expression; 3. Ordered expression; 4. Complete
expression. We make thought definite by putting it into language. So God's wealth
of ideas is in the Word formed into an ordered Kingdom, a true Cosmos; see Mason,
Faith of the Gospel, 76. Max Müller: <q>A word is simply a spoken thought made audible
as sound. Take away from a word the sound, and what is left is simply the thought of
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
it.</q> Whiton, Gloria Patri, 72, 73&mdash;<q>The Greek saw in the word the abiding thought
behind the passing form. The Word was God and yet finite&mdash;finite only as to form,
infinite as to what the form suggests or expresses. By Word some form must be meant,
and any form is finite. The Word is the form taken by the infinite Intelligence which
transcends all forms.</q> We regard this identification of the Word with the finite manifestation
of the Word as contradicted by <emph>John 1:1</emph>, where the Word is represented as
being with God before creation, and by <emph>Phil. 2:6</emph>, where the Word is represented as existing
in the form of God before his self-limitation in human nature. Scripture requires
us to believe in an objectification of God to himself in the person of the Word prior to
any finite manifestation of God to men. Christ existed as the Word, and the Word was
with God, before the Word was made flesh and before the world came into being; in
other words, the Logos was the eternal principle of truth or self-consciousness in the
nature of God.
</p>

<p>
Passages representing Christ as the Image of God are <emph>Col. 1:15&mdash;<q>who is the image of the invisible
God</q></emph>; <emph>2 Cor. 4:4&mdash;<q>Christ, who is the image of God</q></emph> (εἰκών); <emph>Heb. 1:3&mdash;<q>the very image of his substance</q></emph>
(χαρακτὴρ τῆς ὑποστάσεως αὐτοῦ); here χαρακτήρ means <q>impress,</q> <q>counterpart.</q> Christ is
the perfect image of God, as men are not. He therefore has consciousness and will.
He possesses all the attributes and powers of God. The word <q>Image</q> suggests the perfect
equality with God which the title <q>Son</q> might at first seem to deny. The living
Image of God which is equal to himself and is the object of his infinite love can be
nothing less than personal. As the bachelor can never satisfy his longing for companionship
by lining his room with mirrors which furnish only a lifeless reflection of himself,
so God requires for his love a personal as well as an infinite object. The Image is
not precisely the <emph>repetition</emph> of the original. The stamp from the seal is not precisely
the <emph>reproduction</emph> of the seal. The letters on the seal run backwards and can be easily
read only when the impression is before us. So Christ is the only interpretation and
revelation of the hidden Godhead. As only in love do we come to know the depths
of our own being, so it is only in the Son that <emph><q>God is love</q> (1 John 4:8)</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Christ is spoken of as the Effulgence of God in <emph>Heb. 1:3&mdash;<q>who being the effulgence of his glory</q></emph>
(ἀπαύγασμα τῆς δόξης); <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>2 Cor. 4:6&mdash;<q>shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory
of God in the face of Jesus Christ.</q></emph> Notice that the radiance of the sun is as old as the sun
itself, and without it the sun would not be sun. So Christ is coëqual and coëternal
with the Father. <emph>Ps. 84:11&mdash;<q>Jehovah God is a sun.</q></emph> But we cannot see the sun except by
the sunlight. Christ is the sunlight which streams forth from the Sun and which makes
the Sun visible. If there be an eternal Sun, there must be also an eternal Sunlight,
and Christ must be eternal. Westcott on <emph>Hebrews 1:3</emph>&mdash;<q>The use of the absolute timeless
term ὤν, <q><emph>being</emph></q>, guards against the thought that the Lord's sonship was by adoption,
and not by nature. ἀπαύγασμα does not express personality, and χαρακτήρ does not
express coëssentiality. The two words are related exactly as ὁμοούσιος and μονογενής,
and like those must be combined to give the fulness of the truth. The truth expressed
thus antithetically holds good absolutely.... In Christ the essence of God is made distinct;
in Christ the revelation of God's character is seen.</q> On Edwards's view of the
Trinity, together with his quotations from Ramsey's Philosophical Principles, from
which he seems to have derived important suggestions, see Allen, Jonathan Edwards,
338-376; G. P. Fisher, Edwards's Essay on the Trinity, 110-116.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The names thus given to the second person of the Trinity, if they
have <emph>any</emph> significance, bring him before our minds in the general aspect
of Revealer, and suggest a relation of the doctrine of the Trinity to God's
immanent attributes of truth, love, and holiness. The prepositions used to
describe the internal relations of the second person to the first are not prepositions
of rest, but prepositions of direction and movement. The Trinity,
as the organism of Deity, secures a life-movement of the Godhead, a process
in which God evermore objectifies himself and in the Son gives forth
of his fulness. Christ represents the centrifugal action of the deity. But
there must be centripetal action also. In the Holy Spirit the movement is
completed, and the divine activity and thought returns into itself. True
religion, in reuniting us to God, reproduces in us, in our limited measure,
this eternal process of the divine mind. Christian experience witnesses that
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
God in himself is unknown; Christ is the organ of external revelation; the
Holy Spirit is the organ of internal revelation&mdash;only he can give us an
inward apprehension or realization of the truth. It is <q>through the eternal
Spirit</q> that Christ <q>offered himself without blemish unto God,</q> and
it is only through the Holy Spirit that the church has access to the Father,
or fallen creatures can return to God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Here we see that God is Life, self-sufficient Life, Infinite Life, of which the life of the
universe is but a faint reflection, a rill from the fountain, a drop from the ocean.
Since Christ is the only Revealer, the only outgoing principle in the Godhead, it is he
in whom the whole creation comes to be and holds together. He is the Life of nature:
all natural beauty and grandeur, all forces molecular and molar, all laws of gravitation
and evolution, are the work and manifestation of the omnipresent Christ. He is the Life
of humanity: the intellectual and moral impulses of man, so far as they are normal
and uplifting, are due to Christ; he is the principle of progress and improvement in
history. He is the Life of the church: the one and only Redeemer and spiritual Head
of the race is also its Teacher and Lord.
</p>

<p>
All objective revelation of God is the work of Christ. But all subjective manifestation
of God is the work of the Holy Spirit. As Christ is the principle of outgoing, so
the Holy Spirit is the principle of return to God. God would take up finite creatures
into himself, would breath into them his breath, would teach them to launch
their little boats upon the infinite current of his life. Our electric cars can go up hill
at great speed so long as they grip the cable. Faith is the grip which connects us with
the moving energy of God. <q>The universe is homeward bound,</q> because the Holy
Spirit is ever turning objective revelation into subjective revelation, and is leading
men consciously or unconsciously to appropriate the thought and love and purpose of
Him in whom all things find their object and end; <emph><q>for of him and through him, and unto him, are
all things</q> (Rom. 11:36)</emph>,&mdash;here there is allusion to the Father as the source, the Son as the
medium, and the Spirit as the perfecting and completing agent, in God's operations.
But all these external processes are only signs and finite reflections of a life-process
internal to the nature of God.
</p>

<p>
Meyer on <emph>John 1:1&mdash;<q>the Word was with God</q></emph>: <q>πρὸς τὸν θεόν does not = παρὰ τῷ θεῷ, but
expresses the existence of the Logos in God in respect of intercourse. The moral
essence of this essential fellowship is love, which excludes any merely modalistic conception.</q>
Marcus Dods, Expositor's Greek Testament, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>: <q>This preposition
implies intercourse and therefore separate personality.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 62&mdash;<q><emph>And the Word was toward God</emph></q> = his face is not outwards,
as if he were merely revealing, or waiting to reveal, God to the creation. His face is
turned inwards. His whole Person is directed toward God, motion corresponding to
motion, thought to thought.... In him God stands revealed to himself. Contrast
the attitude of fallen Adam, with his face averted from God. Godet, on <emph>John 1:1</emph>&mdash;<q>Πρὸς
τὸν θεόν intimates not only personality but movement.... The tendency of the
Logos <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad extra</foreign> rests upon an anterior and essential relation <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad intra</foreign>. To reveal God,
one must know him; to project him outwardly, one must have plunged into his
bosom.</q> Compare <emph>John 1:18&mdash;<q>the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father</q></emph> (R. V.) where
we find, not ἐν τῷ κόλπῷ, but εἰς τὸν κόλπον. As ἦν εἰς τὴν πόλιν means <q>went into the city
and was there,</q> so the use of these prepositions indicates in the Godhead movement
as well as rest. Dorner, System of Doctrine, 3:193, translates πρός by <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>hingewandt zu</foreign>,</q>
or <q>turned toward.</q> The preposition would then imply that the Revealer, who existed
in the beginning, was ever over against God, in the life-process of the Trinity, as the
perfect objectification of himself. <q>Das Aussichselbstsein kraft des Durchsichselbstsein
mit dem Fürsichselbstsein zusammenschliesst.</q> Dorner speaks of <q>das Aussensichoderineinemandernsein;
Sichgeltendmachen des Ausgeschlossenen; Sichnichtsogesetzthaben;
Stehenbleibenwollen.</q>
</p>

<p>
There is in all human intelligence a threefoldness which points toward a trinitarian
life in God. We can distinguish a <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Wissen</foreign>, a <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Bewusstsein</foreign>, a <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Selbstbewusstein</foreign>. In complete
self-consciousness there are the three elements: 1. We are ourselves; 2. We
form a picture of ourselves; 3. We recognize this picture as the picture of ourselves.
The little child speaks of himself in the third person: <q>Baby did it.</q> The objective
comes before the subject; <q>me</q> comes first, and <q>I</q> is a later development; <q>himself</q>
still holds its place, rather than <q>heself.</q> But this duality belongs only to undeveloped
intelligence; it is characteristic of the animal creation; we revert to it in our
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
dreams; the insane are permanent victims of it; and since sin is moral insanity, the
sinner has no hope until, like the prodigal, he <emph><q>comes to himself</q> (Luke 15:17)</emph>. The insane
person is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mente alienatus</foreign>, and we call physicians for the insane by the name of <emph>alienists</emph>.
Mere duality gives us only the notion of separation. Perfect self-consciousness whether
in man or in God requires a third unifying element. And in God mediation between
the <q>I</q> and the <q>Thou</q> must be the work of a Person also, and the Person who mediates
between the two must be in all respects the equal of either, or he could not adequately
interpret the one to the other; see Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 57-59.
</p>

<p>
Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:179-189, 276-283&mdash;<q>It is one of the effects of conviction by the
Holy Spirit to convert consciousness into self-consciousness.... Conviction of sin is
the consciousness of self as the guilty author of sin. Self-consciousness is trinal, while
mere consciousness is dual.... One and the same human spirit subsists in two modes or
distinctions&mdash;subject and object ... The three hypostatical consciousnesses in their
combination and unity constitute the one consciousness of God ... as the three persons
make one essence.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dorner considers the internal relations of the Trinity (System, 1:412 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) in three
aspects: 1. Physical. God is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa sui</foreign>. But effect that equals cause must itself be
causative. Here would be duality, were it not for a third principle of unity. Trinitas
dualitatem ad unitatem reducit. 2. Logical. Self-consciousness sets self over against
self. Yet the thinker must not regard self as one of many, and call himself <q>he,</q> as
children do; for the thinker would then be, not <emph>self</emph>-conscious, but <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mente alienatus</foreign>,
<q>beside himself.</q> He therefore <q>comes to himself</q> in a third, as the brute cannot.
3. Ethical. God&mdash;self-willing right. But right based on arbitrary will is not right.
Right based on passive nature is not right either. Right as <emph>being</emph>&mdash;Father. Right as
<emph>willing</emph>&mdash;Son. Without the latter principle of freedom, we have a dead ethic, a dead
God, an enthroned necessity. The unity of necessity and freedom is found by God, as
by the Christian, in the Holy Spirit. The Father&mdash;I; the Son&mdash;Me; the Spirit the
unity of the two; see C. C. Everett, Essays, Theological and Literary, 32. There must
be not only Sun and Sunlight, but an Eye to behold the Light. William James, in his
Psychology, distinguishes the <emph>Me</emph>, the self as known, from the <emph>I</emph>, the self as knower.
</p>

<p>
But we need still further to distinguish a third principle, a subject-object, from
both subject and object. The subject cannot recognize the object as one with itself
except through a unifying principle which can be distinguished from both. We may
therefore regard the Holy Spirit as the principle of self-consciousness in man as well
as in God. As there was a natural union of Christ with humanity prior to his redeeming
work, so there is a natural union of the Holy Spirit with all men prior to his regenerating
work: <emph>Job 32:18&mdash;<q>there is a spirit in man, And the breath of the Almighty giveth them understanding.</q></emph>
Kuyper, Work of the Holy Spirit, teaches that the Holy Spirit constitutes the principle
of life in all living things, and animates all rational beings, as well as regenerates and
sanctifies the elect of God. Matheson, Voices of the Spirit, 75, remarks on <emph>Job 34:14, 15&mdash;<q>If
he gather unto himself his Spirit and his breath; all flesh shall perish together</q></emph>&mdash;that the Spirit is not
only necessary to man's salvation, but also to keep up even man's natural life.
</p>

<p>
Ebrard, Dogmatik, 1:172, speaks of the Son as the centrifugal, while the Holy Spirit
is the centripetal movement of the Godhead. God apart from Christ is unrevealed
(<emph>John 1:18&mdash;<q>No man hath seen God at any time</q></emph>); Christ is the organ of external revelation (<emph>18&mdash;<q>the
only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him</q></emph>); the Holy Spirit is the
organ of internal revelation (<emph>1 Cor. 2:10&mdash;<q>unto us Christ revealed them through the Spirit</q></emph>). That
the Holy Spirit is the principle of all movement towards God appears from <emph>Heb. 9:14</emph>&mdash;Christ
<q><emph>through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish unto God</emph></q>; <emph>Eph. 2:28&mdash;<q>access in one Spirit
unto the Father</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 8:26&mdash;<q>the Spirit also helpeth our infirmity ... the Spirit himself maketh intercession for
us</q></emph>; <emph>John 4:24&mdash;<q>God is a Spirit: and they that worship him must worship in spirit</q></emph>; <emph>16:8-11&mdash;<q>convict the world
in respect of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment.</q></emph> See Twesten, Dogmatik, on the Trinity; also
Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 1:111. Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 68&mdash;<q>It is
the joy of the Son to receive, his gladness to welcome most those wishes of the Father
which will cost most to himself. The Spirit also has his joy in making known,&mdash;in
perfecting fellowship and keeping the eternal love alive by that incessant sounding of
the deeps which makes the heart of the Father known to the Son, and the heart of the
Son known to the Father.</q> We may add that the Holy Spirit is the organ of internal
revelation even to the Father and to the Son.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) In the light of what has been said, we may understand somewhat
more fully the characteristic differences between the work of Christ and
that of the Holy Spirit. We may sum them up in the four statements that,
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
first, all outgoing seems to be the work of Christ, all return to God the
work of the Spirit; secondly, Christ is the organ of external revelation,
the Holy Spirit the organ of internal revelation; thirdly, Christ is our
advocate in heaven, the Holy Spirit is our advocate in the soul; fourthly, in
the work of Christ we are passive, in the work of the Spirit we are active.
Of the work of Christ we shall treat more fully hereafter, in speaking of
his Offices as Prophet, Priest, and King. The work of the Holy Spirit
will be treated when we come to speak of the Application of Redemption in
Regeneration and Sanctification. Here it is sufficient to say that the Holy
Spirit is represented in the Scriptures as the author of life&mdash;in creation,
in the conception of Christ, in regeneration, in resurrection; and as the
giver of light&mdash;in the inspiration of Scripture writers, in the conviction of
sinners, in the illumination and sanctification of Christians.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Gen. 1:2&mdash;<q>The Spirit of God was brooding</q></emph>; <emph>Luke 1:35</emph>&mdash;to Mary: <q><emph>The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee</emph></q>,
<emph>John 3:8&mdash;<q>born of the Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>Ps. 37:9, 14&mdash;<q>Come from the four winds, O breath.... I will put my Spirit in
you, and ye shall live</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 8:11&mdash;<q>give life also to your mortal bodies through his Spirit.</q></emph> <emph>1 John 2:1&mdash;<q rend='pre'>an advocate</q></emph>
(παράκλητον) <emph><q rend='post'>with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous</q></emph>; <emph>John 14:16, 17&mdash;<q rend='pre'>another Comforter</q></emph> (παράκλητον),
<emph><q rend='post'>that he may be with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 8:26&mdash;<q>the Spirit himself maketh intercession for
us.</q></emph> <emph>2 Pet. 1:21&mdash;<q>men spake from God, being moved by the Holy Spirit</q></emph>; <emph>John 16:8&mdash;<q>convict the world in respect
of sin</q></emph>; <emph>13&mdash;<q>when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he shall guide you into all the truth</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 8:14&mdash;<q>as many as
are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
McCosh: The works of the Spirit are Conviction, Conversion, Sanctification, Comfort.
Donovan: The Spirit is the Spirit of conviction, enlightenment, quickening, in
the sinner; and of revelation, remembrance, witness, sanctification, consolation, to
the saint. The Spirit enlightens the sinner, as the flash of lightning lights the traveler
stumbling on the edge of a precipice at night; enlightens the Christian, as the rising
sun reveals a landscape which was all there before, but which was hidden from sight
until the great luminary made it visible. <q>The morning light did not create The lovely
prospect it revealed; It only showed the real state Of what the darkness had concealed.</q>
Christ's advocacy before the throne is like that of legal counsel pleading in our stead;
the Holy Spirit's advocacy in the heart is like the mother's teaching her child to pray
for himself.
</p>

<p>
J. W. A. Stewart: <q>Without the work of the Holy Spirit redemption would have
been impossible, as impossible as that fuel should warm without being lighted, or that
bread should nourish without being eaten. Christ is God entering into human history,
but without the Spirit Christianity would be only history. The Holy Spirit is God
entering into human hearts. The Holy Spirit turns creed into life. Christ is the physician
who leaves the remedy and then departs. The Holy Spirit is the nurse who
applies and administers the remedy, and who remains with the patient until the cure
is completed.</q> Matheson, Voices of the Spirit, 78&mdash;<q>It is in vain that the mirror exists
in the room, if it is lying on its face; the sunbeams cannot reach it till its face is
upturned to them. Heaven lies about thee not only in thine infancy but at all times.
But it is not enough that a place is prepared for thee; thou must be prepared for the
place. It is not enough that thy light has come; thou thyself must arise and shine.
No outward shining can reveal, unless thou art thyself a reflector of its glory. The
Spirit must set thee on thy feet, that thou mayest hear him that speaks to thee
(Ez. 2:2).</q>
</p>

<p>
The Holy Spirit reveals not himself but Christ. <emph>John 16:14&mdash;<q>He shall glorify me: for he shall
take of mine, and shall declare it unto you.</q></emph> So should the servants of the Spirit hide themselves
while they make known Christ. E. H. Johnson, The Holy Spirit, 40&mdash;<q>Some years ago
a large steam engine all of glass was exhibited about the country. When it was at
work one would see the piston and the valves go; but no one could see what made
them go. When steam is hot enough to be a continuous elastic vapor, it is invisible.</q>
So we perceive the presence of the Holy Spirit, not by visions or voices, but by the
effect he produces within us in the shape of new knowledge, new love, and new energy
of our own powers. Denney, Studies in Theology, 161&mdash;<q>No man can bear witness to
Christ and to himself at the same time. <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Esprit</foreign> is fatal to unction; no man can give
the impression that he himself is clever and also that Christ is mighty to save. The
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
power of the Holy Spirit is felt only when the witness is unconscious of self, and when
others remain unconscious of him.</q> Moule, Veni Creator, 8&mdash;<q>The Holy Spirit, as
Tertullian says, is the vicar of Christ. The night before the Cross, the Holy Spirit was
present to the mind of Christ as a person.</q>
</p>

<p>
Gore, in Lux Mundi, 318&mdash;<q>It was a point in the charge against Origen that his language
seemed to involve an exclusion of the Holy Spirit from nature, and a limitation
of his activity to the church. The whole of life is certainly his. And yet, because his
special attribute is holiness, it is in rational natures, which alone are capable of holiness,
that he exerts his special influence. A special inbreathing of the divine Spirit
gave to man his proper being.</q> See <emph>Gen. 2:7&mdash;<q>Jehovah God ... breathed into his nostrils the breath
of life; and man became a living soul</q></emph>; <emph>John 3:8&mdash;<q>The Spirit breatheth where it will ... so is every one that is
born of the Spirit.</q></emph> E. H. Johnson, on The Offices of the Holy Spirit, in Bib. Sac., July, 1892:381-382&mdash;<q>Why
is he specially called the Holy, when Father and Son are also holy,
unless because he produces holiness, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, makes the holiness of God to be ours individually?
Christ is the principle of collectivism, the Holy Spirit the principle of individualism.
The Holy Spirit shows man the Christ in him. God above all = Father; God
through all = Son; God in all = Holy Spirit (<emph>Eph. 4:6</emph>).</q>
</p>

<p>
The doctrine of the Holy Spirit has never yet been scientifically unfolded. No treatise
on it has appeared comparable to Julius Müller's Doctrine of Sin, or to I. A. Dorner's
History of the Doctrine of the Person of Christ. The progress of doctrine in the past
has been marked by successive stages. Athanasius treated of the Trinity; Augustine
of sin; Anselm of the atonement; Luther of justification; Wesley of regeneration;
and each of these unfoldings of doctrine has been accompanied by religious awakening.
We still wait for a complete discussion of the doctrine of the Holy Spirit, and
believe that widespread revivals will follow the recognition of the omnipotent Agent
in revivals. On the relations of the Holy Spirit to Christ, see Owen, in Works, 3:152-159;
on the Holy Spirit's nature and work, see works by Faber, Smeaton, Tophel, G.
Campbell Morgan, J. D. Robertson, Biederwolf; also C. E. Smith, The Baptism of Fire;
J. D. Thompson, The Holy Comforter; Bushnell, Forgiveness and Law, last chapter;
Bp. Andrews, Works, 3:107-400; James S. Candlish, Work of the Holy Spirit; Redford,
Vox Dei; Andrew Murray, The Spirit of Christ; A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit;
Kuyper, Work of the Holy Spirit; J. E. Cumming, Through the Eternal Spirit; Lechler,
Lehre vom Heiligen Geiste; Arthur, Tongue of Fire; A. H. Strong, Philosophy and
Religion, 250-258, and Christ in Creation, 297-313.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. Generation and procession consistent with equality.</head>

<p>
That the Sonship of Christ is eternal, is intimated in Psalm 2:7. <q>This
day have I begotten thee</q> is most naturally interpreted as the declaration
of an eternal fact in the divine nature. Neither the incarnation, the
baptism, the transfiguration, nor the resurrection marks the beginning of
Christ's Sonship, or constitutes him Son of God. These are but recognitions
or manifestations of a preëxisting Sonship, inseparable from his Godhood.
He is <q>born before every creature</q> (while yet no created thing
existed&mdash;see Meyer on Col. 1:15) and <q>by the resurrection of the dead</q>
is not <emph>made</emph> to be, but only <q><emph>declared</emph> to be,</q> <q>according to the Spirit of
holiness</q> (= according to his divine nature) <q>the Son of God with
power</q> (see Philippi and Alford on Rom. 1:3, 4). This Sonship is unique&mdash;not
predicable of, or shared with, any creature. The Scriptures intimate,
not only an eternal generation of the Son, but an eternal procession
of the Spirit.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<emph>Psalm 2:7&mdash;<q>I will tell of the decree: Jehovah said unto me, Thou art my Son; This day I have begotten thee</q></emph>
see Alexander, Com. <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>; also Com. on <emph>Acts 13:33</emph>&mdash;<q><emph><q>To-day</q></emph> refers to the date of the
decree itself; but this, as a divine act, was eternal,&mdash;and so must be the Sonship which
it affirms.</q> Philo says that <q>to-day</q> with God means <q>forever.</q> This begetting of
which the Psalm speaks is not the resurrection, for while Paul in <emph>Acts 13:33</emph> refers to this
Psalm to establish the fact of Jesus' Sonship, he refers in <emph>Acts 13:34, 35</emph> to another Psalm,
the <emph>sixteenth</emph>, to establish the fact that this Son of God was to rise from the dead. Christ
is shown to be Son of God by his incarnation (<emph>Heb. 1:5, 6&mdash;<q>when he again bringeth in the firstborn
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
into the world he saith, And let all the angels of God worship him</q></emph>), his baptism (<emph>Mat. 3:17&mdash;<q>This is my beloved
Son</q></emph>), his transfiguration (<emph>Mat. 17:5&mdash;<q>This is my beloved Son</q></emph>), his resurrection (<emph>Acts 13:34, 35&mdash;<q>as
concerning that he raised him up from the dead ... he saith also in another psalm, Thou wilt not give thy Holy One
to see corruption</q></emph>). <emph>Col. 1:15&mdash;<q>the firstborn of all creation</q></emph>&mdash;πρωτότοκος πάσης κτίσεως = <q>begotten
first before all creation</q> (Julius Müller, Proof-texts, 14); or <q>first-born before every
creature, <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, begotten, and that antecedently to everything that was created</q> (Ellicott,
Com. <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>). <q>Herein</q> (says Luthardt, Compend. Dogmatik, 81, on <emph>Col. 1:15</emph>) <q>is
indicated an antemundane origin from God&mdash;a relation internal to the divine nature.</q>
Lightfoot, on <emph>Col. 1:15</emph>, says that in Rabbi Bechai God is called the <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primogenitus mundi</foreign>.</q>
</p>

<p>
On <emph>Rom. 1:4</emph> (ὁρισθέντος = <q>manifested to be the mighty Son of God</q>) see Lange's
Com., notes by Schaff on pages 56 and 61. Bruce, Apologetics, 404&mdash;<q>The resurrection
was the actual introduction of Christ into the full possession of divine Sonship so far as
thereto belonged, not only the <emph>inner</emph> of a holy spiritual essence, but also the <emph>outer</emph> of an
existence in power and heavenly glory.</q> Allen, Jonathan Edwards, 353, 354&mdash;<q>Calvin
waves aside eternal generation as an <q>absurd fiction.</q> But to maintain the deity of
Christ merely on the ground that it is essential to his making an adequate atonement
for sin, is to involve the rejection of his deity if ever the doctrine of atonement
becomes obnoxious.... Such was the process by which, in the mind of the last century,
the doctrine of the Trinity was undermined. Not to ground the distinctions of
the divine essence by some immanent eternal necessity was to make easy the denial of
what has been called the ontological Trinity, and then the rejection of the economical
Trinity was not difficult or far away.</q>
</p>

<p>
If Westcott and Hort's reading ὁ μονογενὴς Θεός, <q><emph>the only begotten God</emph>,</q> in <emph>John 1:18</emph>, is correct,
we have a new proof of Christ's eternal Sonship. Meyer explains ἑαυτοῦ in <emph>Rom. 8:3&mdash;<q>God,
sending his own Son,</q></emph> as an allusion to the metaphysical Sonship. That this Sonship is
unique, is plain from <emph>John 1:14, 18&mdash;<q>the only begotten from the Father ... the only begotten Son who is in
the bosom of the father</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 8:32&mdash;<q>his own Son</q></emph>; <emph>Gal. 4:4&mdash;<q>sent forth his Son</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Prov. 8:22-31&mdash;<q>When
he marked out the foundations of the earth; Then I was by him as a master workman</q></emph>; <emph>30:4&mdash;<q>Who hath established all
the ends of the earth? What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou knowest?</q></emph> The eternal procession
of the Spirit seems to be implied in <emph>John 15:26&mdash;<q>the Spirit of truth which proceedeth from the Father</q></emph>&mdash;see
Westcott, Bib. Com., <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>; <emph>Heb. 9:14&mdash;<q>the eternal Spirit.</q></emph> Westcott here says that
παρά (not ἐξ) shows that the reference is to the temporal mission of the Holy Spirit, not
to the eternal procession. At the same time he maintains that the temporal corresponds
to the eternal.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The Scripture terms <q>generation</q> and <q>procession,</q> as applied to the
Son and to the Holy Spirit, are but approximate expressions of the truth,
and we are to correct by other declarations of Scripture any imperfect
impressions which we might derive solely from them. We use these terms
in a special sense, which we explicitly state and define as excluding all
notion of inequality between the persons of the Trinity. The eternal generation
of the Son to which we hold is
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Not creation, but the Father's communication of himself to the
Son. Since the names, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are not applicable to
the divine essence, but are only applicable to its hypostatical distinctions,
they imply no derivation of the essence of the Son from the essence of
the Father.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The error of the Nicene Fathers was that of explaining Sonship as derivation of
essence. The Father cannot impart his essence to the Son and yet retain it. The
Father is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fons trinitatis</foreign>, not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fons deitatis</foreign>. See Shedd, Hist. Doct., 1:308-311, and Dogm.
Theol., 1:287-299; <hi rend='italic'>per contra</hi>, see Bib. Sac., 41:698-760.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) Not a commencement of existence, but an eternal relation to the
Father,&mdash;there never having been a time when the Son began to be, or
when the Son did not exist as God with the Father.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
If there had been an eternal sun, it is evident that there must have been an eternal
sunlight also. Yet an eternal sunlight must have evermore proceeded from the sun.
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
When Cyril was asked whether the Son existed before generation, he answered: <q>The
generation of the Son did not precede his existence, but he always existed, and that by
generation.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Not an act of the Father's will, but an internal necessity of the
divine nature,&mdash;so that the Son is no more dependent upon the Father than
the Father is dependent upon the Son, and so that, if it be consistent with
deity to be Father, it is equally consistent with deity to be Son.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The sun is as dependent upon the sunlight as the sunlight is upon the sun; for without
sunlight the sun is no true sun. So God the Father is as dependent upon God the
Son, as God the Son is dependent upon God the Father; for without Son the Father
would be no true Father. To say that aseity belongs only to the Father is logically Arianism
and Subordinationism proper, for it implies a subordination of the essence of the
Son to the Father. Essential subordination would be inconsistent with equality. See
Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 1:115. Palmer, Theol. Definitions, 66, 67, says
that Father = independent life; Son begotten = independent life voluntarily brought
under limitations; Spirit = necessary consequence of existence of the other two....
The words and actions whereby we design to affect others are <q>begotten.</q> The atmosphere
of unconscious influence is not <q>begotten,</q> but <q>proceeding.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Not a relation in any way analogous to physical derivation, but a life-movement
of the divine nature, in virtue of which Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, while equal in essence and dignity, stand to each other in an order
of personality, office, and operation, and in virtue of which the Father
works through the Son, and the Father and the Son through the Spirit.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The subordination of the <emph>person</emph> of the Son to the <emph>person</emph> of the Father, or in other
words an order of personality, office, and operation which permits the Father to be
officially first, the Son second, and the Spirit third, is perfectly consistent with equality.
Priority is not necessarily superiority. The possibility of an order, which yet involves
no inequality, may be illustrated by the relation between man and woman. In office
man is first and woman second, but woman's soul is worth as much as man's; see <emph>1 Cor.
11:3&mdash;<q>the head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man: and the head of Christ is God.</q></emph> On
<emph>John 14:28&mdash;<q>the Father is greater than I</q></emph>&mdash;see Westcott, Bib. Com., <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Edwards, Observations on the Trinity (edited by Smyth), 22&mdash;<q>In the Son the whole
deity and glory of the Father is as it were repeated or duplicated. Everything in the
Father is repeated or expressed again, and that fully, so that there is properly no
inferiority.</q> Edwards, Essay on the Trinity (edited by Fisher), 110-116&mdash;<q>The Father
is the Deity subsisting in the prime, unoriginated, and most absolute manner, or the
Deity in its direct existence. The Son is the Deity generated by God's understanding,
or having an Idea of himself and subsisting in that Idea. The Holy Ghost is the Deity
subsisting in act, or the divine essence flowing out and breathed forth in God's infinite
love to and delight in himself. And I believe the whole divine essence does truly and
distinctly subsist both in the divine Idea and in the divine Love, and each of them are
properly distinct persons.... We find no other attributes of which it is said in Scripture
that they are God, or that God is they, but λόγος and ἀγάπη, the Reason and the
Love of God, Light not being different from Reason.... Understanding may be predicated
of this Love.... It is not a blind Love.... The Father has Wisdom or Reason
by the Son's being in him.... Understanding is in the Holy Spirit, because the Son is
in him.</q> Yet Dr. Edwards A. Park declared eternal generation to be <q>eternal nonsense,</q>
and is thought to have hid Edwards's unpublished Essay on the Trinity for
many years because it taught this doctrine.
</p>

<p>
The New Testament calls Christ θεός, but not ὁ θεός. We frankly recognize an eternal
subordination of Christ to the Father, but we maintain at the same time that this subordination
is a subordination of order, office, and operation, not a subordination of
essence. <q>Non de essentia dicitur, sed de ministeriis.</q> E. G. Robinson: <q>An eternal
generation is necessarily an eternal subordination and dependence. This seems to be
fully admitted even by the most orthodox of the Anglican writers, such as Pearson
and Hooker. Christ's subordination to the Father is merely official, not essential.</q>
Whiton, Gloria Patri, 42, 96&mdash;<q>The early Trinitarians by eternal Sonship meant,
first, that it is of the very nature of Deity to issue forth into visible expression. Thus
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
next, that this outward expression of God is not something other than God, but God
himself, in a self-expression as divine as the hidden Deity. Thus they answered Philip's
cry, <emph><q>show us the Father, and it sufficeth us</q> (John 14:8)</emph>, and thus they affirmed Jesus' declaration,
they secured Paul's faith that God has never left himself without witness. They meant,
<emph><q>he that hath seen me hath seen the Father</q> (John 14:9)</emph>.... The Father is the Life transcendent, the
divine Source, <q><emph>above all</emph></q>; the Son is the Life immanent, the divine Stream, <q><emph>through all</emph></q>;
the Holy Spirit is the Life individualized, <emph><q>in all</q> (Eph. 4:6)</emph>. The Holy Spirit has been
called <q>the executive of the Godhead.</q></q> Whiton is here speaking of the economic Trinity;
but all this is even more true of the immanent Trinity. On the Eternal Sonship,
see Weiss, Bib. Theol. N. T., 424, note; Treffrey, Eternal Sonship of our Lord; Princeton
Essays, 1:30-56; Watson, Institutes, 1:530-577; Bib. Sac., 27:268. On the procession
of the Spirit, see Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:300-304, and History of Doctrine, 1:387;
Dick, Lectures on Theology, 1:347-350.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The same principles upon which we interpret the declaration of Christ's
eternal Sonship apply to the procession of the Holy Spirit from the Father
through the Son, and show this to be not inconsistent with the Spirit's
equal dignity and glory.
</p>

<p>
We therefore only formulate truth which is concretely expressed in
Scripture, and which is recognized by all ages of the church in hymns and
prayers addressed to Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, when we assert that in
the nature of the one God there are three eternal distinctions, which are
best described as persons, and each of which is the proper and equal object
of Christian worship.
</p>

<p>
We are also warranted in declaring that, in virtue of these personal
distinctions or modes of subsistence, God exists in the relations, respectively,
first, of Source, Origin, Authority, and in this relation is the Father;
secondly, of Expression, Medium, Revelation, and in this relation is the
Son; thirdly, of Apprehension, Accomplishment, Realization, and in this
relation is the Holy Spirit.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
John Owen, Works, 3:64-92&mdash;<q>The office of the Holy Spirit is that of concluding,
completing, perfecting. To the Father we assign <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>opera naturæ</foreign>; to the Son, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>opera
gratiæ procuratæ</foreign>; to the Spirit, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>opera gratiæ applicatæ</foreign>.</q> All God's revelations are
through the Son or the Spirit, and the latter includes the former. Kuyper, Work of
the Holy Spirit, designates the three offices respectively as those of Causation, Construction,
Consummation; the Father brings forth, the Son arranges, the Spirit perfects.
Allen, Jonathan Edwards, 365-373&mdash;<q>God is Life, Light, Love. As the Fathers
regarded Reason both in God and man as the personal, omnipresent second Person of
the Trinity, so Jonathan Edwards regarded Love both in God and in man as the personal,
omnipresent third Person of the Trinity. Hence the Father is never said to love
the Spirit as he is said to love the Son&mdash;for this love <emph>is</emph> the Spirit. The Father and the
Son are said to love men, but the Holy Spirit is never said to love them, for love <emph>is</emph> the
Holy Spirit. But why could not Edwards also hold that the Logos or divine Reason
also dwelt in humanity, so that manhood was constituted in Christ and shared with
him in the consubstantial image of the Father? Outward nature reflects God's light
and has Christ in it,&mdash;why not universal humanity?</q>
</p>

<p>
Moberly, Atonement and Personality, 136, 202, speaks of <q>1. God, the Eternal, the
Infinite, in his infinity, as himself; 2. God, as self-expressed within the nature and
faculties of man&mdash;body, soul, and spirit&mdash;the consummation and interpretation and
revelation of what true manhood means and is, in its very truth, in its relation to God;
3. God, as Spirit of Beauty and Holiness, which are himself present in things created,
animate and inanimate, and constituting in them their divine response to God; constituting
above all in created personalities the full reality of their personal response.
Or again: 1. What a man is invisibly in himself; 2. his outward material projection or
expression as body; and 3. the response which that which he is through his bodily
utterance or operation makes to him, as the true echo or expression of himself.</q> Moberly
seeks thus to find in man's nature an analogy to the inner processes of the divine.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>VI. Inscrutable, yet not self-contradictory, this Doctrine furnishes
the Key to all other Doctrines.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. The mode of this triune existence is inscrutable.</head>

<p>
It is inscrutable because there are no analogies to it in our finite experience.
For this reason all attempts are vain adequately to represent it;
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) From inanimate things&mdash;as the fountain, the stream, and the rivulet
trickling from it (Athanasius); the cloud, the rain, and the rising mist
(Boardman); color, shape, and size (F. W. Robertson); the actinic, luminiferous,
and calorific principles in the ray of light (Solar Hieroglyphics,
34).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Luther: <q>When logic objects to this doctrine that it does not square with her rules,
we must say; <q>Mulier taceat in ecclesia.</q></q> Luther called the Trinity a flower, in which
might be distinguished its form, its fragrance, and its medicinal efficacy; see Dorner,
Gesch. prot. Theol., 189. In Bap. Rev., July, 1880:434, Geer finds an illustration of the
Trinity in infinite space with its three dimensions. For analogy of the cloud, rain,
mist, see W. E. Boardman, Higher Christian Life. Solar Hieroglyphics, 34 (reviewed
in New Englander, Oct. 1874:789)&mdash;<q>The Godhead is a tripersonal unity, and the light
is a trinity. Being immaterial and homogeneous, and thus essentially one in its nature,
the light includes a plurality of constituents, or in other words is essentially three in
its constitution, its constituent principles being the actinic, the luminiferous, and the
calorific; and in glorious manifestation the light is one, and is the created, constituted,
and ordained emblem of the tripersonal God</q>&mdash;of whom it is said that <emph><q>God is light, and
in him is no darkness at all</q> (1 John 1:5)</emph>. The actinic rays are in themselves invisible; only as
the luminiferous manifest them, are they seen; only as the calorific accompany them,
are they felt.
</p>

<p>
Joseph Cook: <q>Sunlight, rainbow, heat&mdash;one solar radiance; Father, Son, Holy Spirit,
one God. As the rainbow shows what light is when unfolded, so Christ reveals the
nature of God. As the rainbow is unraveled light, so Christ is unraveled God, and the
Holy Spirit, figured by heat, is Christ's continued life.</q> Ruder illustrations are those
of Oom Paul Krüger: the fat, the wick, the flame, in the candle; and of Augustine:
the root, trunk, branches, all of one wood, in the tree. In Geer's illustration, mentioned
above, from the three dimensions of space, we cannot demonstrate that there is not a
fourth, but besides length, breadth, and thickness, we cannot conceive of its existence.
As these three exhaust, so far as we know, all possible modes of material being, so we
cannot conceive of any fourth person in the Godhead.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) From the constitution or processes of our own minds&mdash;as the
psychological unity of intellect, affection, and will (substantially held by
Augustine); the logical unity of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis (Hegel);
the metaphysical unity of subject, object, and subject-object (Melanchthon,
Olshausen, Shedd).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Augustine: <q>Mens meminit sui, intelligit se, diligit se; si hoc cernimus, Trinitatem
cernimus.</q>... I exist, I am conscious, I will; I exist as conscious and willing, I am
conscious of existing and willing, I will to exist and be conscious; and these three
functions, though distinct, are inseparable and form one life, one mind, one essence....
<q>Amor autem alicujus amantis est, et amore aliquid amatur. Ecce tria sunt,
amans, et quod amatur, et amor. Quid est ergo amor, nisi quædam vita duo aliqua
copulans, vel copulare appetans, amantem scilicet et quod amatur.</q> Calvin speaks of
Augustine's view as <q>a speculation far from solid.</q> But Augustine himself had said:
<q>If asked to define the Trinity, we can only say that it is not this or that.</q> John of
Damascus: <q>All we know of the divine nature is that it is not to be known.</q> By this,
however, both Augustine and John of Damascus meant only that the precise <emph>mode</emph> of
God's triune existence is unrevealed and inscrutable.
</p>

<p>
Hegel, Philos. Relig., transl., 3:99, 100&mdash;<q>God is, but is at the same time the Other,
the self-differentiating, the Other in the sense that this Other is God himself and has
potentially the Divine nature in it, and that the abolishing of this difference, of this
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
otherness, this return, this love, is Spirit.</q> Hegel calls God <q>the absolute Idea, the
unity of Life and Cognition, the Universal that thinks itself and thinkingly recognizes
itself in an infinite Actuality, from which, as its Immediacy, it no less distinguishes
itself again</q>; see Schwegler, History of Philosophy, 321, 331. Hegel's general doctrine
is that the highest unity is to be reached only through the fullest development and
reconciliation of the deepest and widest antagonism. Pure being is pure nothing; we
must die to live. Light is thesis, Darkness is antithesis, Shadow is synthesis, or union
of both. Faith is thesis, Unbelief is antithesis, Doubt is synthesis, or union of both.
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Zweifel</foreign> comes from <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Zwei</foreign>, as doubt from δύο. Hegel called Napoleon <q>ein Weltgeist zu
Pferde</q>&mdash;<q>a world-spirit on horseback.</q> Ladd, Introd. to Philosophy, 202, speaks of
<q>the monotonous tit-tat-too of the Hegelian logic.</q> Ruskin speaks of it as <q>pure,
definite, and highly finished nonsense.</q> On the Hegelian principle good and evil cannot
be contradictory to each other; without evil there could be no good. Stirling well
entitled his exposition of the Hegelian Philosophy <q>The Secret of Hegel,</q> and his
readers have often remarked that, if Stirling discovered the secret, he never made
it known.
</p>

<p>
Lord Coleridge told Robert Browning that he could not understand all his poetry.
<q>Ah, well,</q> replied the poet, <q>if a reader of your calibre understands ten per cent. of
what I write, he ought to be content.</q> When Wordsworth was told that Mr. Browning
had married Miss Barrett, he said: <q>It is a good thing that these two understand each
other, for no one else understands them.</q> A pupil once brought to Hegel a passage in
the latter's writings and asked for an interpretation. The philosopher examined it and
replied: <q>When that passage was written, there were two who knew its meaning&mdash;God
and myself. Now, alas! there is but one, and that is God.</q> Heinrich Heine, speaking
of the effect of Hegelianism upon the religious life of Berlin, says: <q>I could
accommodate myself to the very enlightened Christianity, filtrated from all superstition,
which could then be had in the churches, and which was free from the divinity
of Christ, like turtle soup without turtle.</q> When German systems of philosophy die,
their ghosts take up their abode in Oxford. But if I see a ghost sitting in a chair and
then sit down boldly in the chair, the ghost will take offence and go away. Hegel's
doctrine of God as the only begotten Son is translated in the Journ. Spec. Philos.,
15:395-404.
</p>

<p>
The most satisfactory exposition of the analogy of subject, object, and subject-object
is to be found in Shedd, History of Doctrine, 1:365, note 2. See also Olshausen on
John 1:1; H. N. Day, Doctrine of Trinity in Light of Recent Psychology, in Princeton Rev.,
Sept. 1882:156-179; Morris, Philosophy and Christianity, 122-163. Moberly, Atonement
and Personality, 174, has a similar analogy: 1. A man's invisible self; 2. the visible
expression of himself in a picture or poem; 3. the response of this picture or poem to
himself. The analogy of the family is held to be even better, because no man's personality
is complete in itself; husband, wife, and child are all needed to make perfect
unity. Allen, Jonathan Edwards, 372, says that in the early church the Trinity was a
doctrine of reason; in the Middle Ages it was a mystery; in the 18th century it was
a meaningless or irrational dogma; again in the 19th century it becomes a doctrine of
the reason, a truth essential to the nature of God. To Allen's characterization of the
stages in the history of the doctrine we would add that even in our day we cannot say
that a complete exposition of the Trinity is possible. Trinity is a unique fact, different
aspects of which may be illustrated, while, as a whole, it has no analogies. The
most we can say is that human nature, in its processes and powers, points towards
something higher than itself, and that Trinity in God is needed in order to constitute
that perfection of being which man seeks as an object of love, worship and service.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
No one of these furnishes any proper analogue of the Trinity, since in
no one of them is there found the essential element of tripersonality. Such
illustrations may sometimes be used to disarm objection, but they furnish
no positive explanation of the mystery of the Trinity, and, unless carefully
guarded, may lead to grievous error.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. The Doctrine of the Trinity is not self-contradictory.</head>

<p>
This it would be, only if it declared God to be three in the same numerical
sense in which he is said to be one. This we do not assert. We assert
simply that the same God who is one with respect to his essence is three
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
with respect to the internal distinctions of that essence, or with respect to
the modes of his being. The possibility of this cannot be denied, except
by assuming that the human mind is in all respects the measure of the
divine.
</p>

<p>
The fact that the ascending scale of life is marked by increasing differentiation
of faculty and function should rather lead us to expect in the highest
of all beings a nature more complex than our own. In man many faculties
are united in one intelligent being, and the more intelligent man is, the
more distinct from each other these faculties become; until intellect and
affection, conscience and will assume a relative independence, and there
arises even the possibility of conflict between them. There is nothing irrational
or self-contradictory in the doctrine that in God the leading functions
are yet more markedly differentiated, so that they become personal, while
at the same time these personalities are united by the fact that they each
and equally manifest the one indivisible essence.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Unity is as essential to the Godhead as threeness. The same God who in one respect
is three, in another respect is one. We do not say that one God is three Gods, nor that
one person is three persons, nor that three Gods are one God, but only that there is one
God with three distinctions in his being. We do not refer to the faculties of man as
furnishing any proper analogy to the persons of the Godhead; we rather deny that
man's nature furnishes any such analogy. Intellect, affection, and will in man are not
distinct personalities. If they were personalized, they might furnish such an analogy.
F. W. Robertson, Sermons, 3:58, speaks of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit as best
conceived under the figure of personalized intellect, affection and will. With this
agrees the saying of Socrates, who called thought the soul's conversation with itself.
See D. W. Simon, in Bib. Sac., Jan. 1887.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Ps. 86:11&mdash;<q>Unite my heart to fear thy name</q></emph>&mdash;intimates a complexity of powers in man, and
a possible disorganization due to sin. Only the fear and love of God can reduce our
faculties to order and give us peace, purity, and power. When William after a long
courtship at length proposed marriage, Mary said that she <q>unanimously consented.</q>
<emph><q>Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy
mind</q> (Luke 10:27).</emph> Man must not lead a dual life, a double life, like that of Dr. Jekyll
and Mr. Hyde. The good life is the unified life. H. H. Bawden: <q>Theoretically, symmetrical
development is the complete criterion. This is the old Greek conception of
the perfect life. The term which we translate <q>temperance</q> or <q>self-control</q> is better
expressed by <q>whole-mindedness.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
Illingworth, Personality Divine and Human, 54-80&mdash;<q>Our sense of divine personality
culminates in the doctrine of the Trinity. Man's personality is essentially triune,
because it consists of a subject, an object, and their relation. What is potential and
unrealized triunity in man is complete in God.... Our own personality is triune, but
it is a potential unrealized triunity, which is incomplete in itself and must go beyond
itself for completion, as for example in the family.... But God's personality has
nothing potential or unrealized about it.... Trinity is the most intelligible mode of
conceiving of God as personal.</q>
</p>

<p>
John Caird, Fundamental Ideas of Christianity, 1:59, 80&mdash;<q>The parts of a stone are
all precisely alike; the parts of a skilful mechanism are all different from one another.
In which of the two cases is the unity more real&mdash;in that in which there is an absence
of distinction, or in that in which there is essential difference of form and function,
each separate part having an individuality and activity of its own? The highest
unities are not simple but complex.</q> Gordon, Christ of To-day, 106&mdash;<q>All things and
persons are modes of one infinite consciousness. Then it is not incredible that there
should be three consciousnesses in God. Over against the multitudinous finite personalities
are three infinite personalities. This socialism in Deity may be the ground
of human society.</q>
</p>

<p>
The phenomena of double and even of triple consciousness in one and the same individual
confirm this view. This fact of more than one consciousness in a finite creature
points towards the possibility of a threefold consciousness in the nature of God.
Romanes, Mind and Motion, 102, intimates that the social organism, if it attained the
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
highest level of psychical perfection, might be endowed with personality, and that it
now has something resembling it&mdash;phenomena of thought and conduct which compel
us to conceive of families and communities and nations as having a sort of moral
personality which implies responsibility and accountability. <q>The <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Zeitgeist</foreign>,</q> he
says, <q>is the product of a kind of collective psychology, which is something other than
the sum of all the individual minds of a generation.</q> We do not maintain that any
one of these fragmentary or collective consciousnesses attains personality in man, at
least in the present life. We only maintain that they indicate that a larger and more
complex life is possible than that of which we have common experience, and that
there is no necessary contradiction in the doctrine that in the nature of the one and
perfect God there are three personal distinctions. R. H. Hutton: <q>A voluntary self-revelation
of the divine mind may be expected to reveal even deeper complexities of
spiritual relations in his eternal nature and essence than are found to exist in our
humanity&mdash;the simplicity of a harmonized complexity, not the simplicity of absolute
unity.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. The doctrine of the Trinity has important relations to other doctrines.</head>

<p>
A. It is essential to any proper theism.
</p>

<p>
Neither God's independence nor God's blessedness can be maintained
upon grounds of absolute unity. Anti-trinitarianism almost necessarily
makes creation indispensable to God's perfection, tends to a belief in the
eternity of matter, and ultimately leads, as in Mohammedanism, and in
modern Judaism and Unitarianism, to Pantheism. <q>Love is an impossible
exercise to a solitary being.</q> Without Trinity we cannot hold to a living
Unity in the Godhead.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Brit. and For. Evang. Rev., Jan. 1882:35-63&mdash;<q>The problem is to find a <emph>perfect objective</emph>,
congruous and fitting, for a perfect intelligence, and the answer is: <q><emph>a perfect
intelligence</emph>.</q></q> The author of this article quotes James Martineau, the Unitarian philosopher,
as follows: <q>There is only one resource left for completing the needful
Objectivity for God, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>, to admit in some form the coëval existence of matter, as the
condition or medium of the divine agency or manifestation. Failing the proof [of the
absolute origination of matter] we are left with the <emph>divine cause</emph>, and the <emph>material condition</emph>
of all nature, in eternal co-presence and relation, as supreme object and rudimentary
object.</q> See also Martineau, Study, 1:405&mdash;<q>In denying that a plurality of
self-existences is possible, I mean to speak only of self-existent <emph>causes</emph>. A self-existence
which is <emph>not</emph> a cause is by no means excluded, so far as I can see, by a self-existence
which <emph>is</emph> a cause; nay, is even required for the exercise of its causality.</q> Here we see
that Martineau's Unitarianism logically drove him into Dualism. But God's blessedness,
upon this principle, requires not merely an eternal universe but an infinite universe,
for nothing less will afford fit object for an infinite mind. Yet a God who is
necessarily bound to the universe, or by whose side a universe, which is not himself,
eternally exists, is not infinite, independent, or free. The only exit from this difficulty
is in denying God's self-consciousness and self-determination, or in other words,
exchanging our theism for dualism, and our dualism for pantheism.
</p>

<p>
E. H. Johnson, in Bib. Sac., July, 1892:379, quotes from Oxenham's Catholic Doctrine
of the Atonement, 108, 109&mdash;<q>Forty years ago James Martineau wrote to George Macdonald:
<q>Neither my intellectual preference nor my moral admiration goes heartily with
the Unitarian heroes, sects or productions, of any age. Ebionites, Arians, Socinians,
all seem to me to contrast unfavorably with their opponents, and to exhibit a type of
thought far less worthy, on the whole, of the true genius of Christianity.</q> In his paper
entitled A Way out of the Unitarian Controversy, Martineau says that the Unitarian
worships the Father; the Trinitarian worships the Son: <q>But he who is the Son in one
creed is the Father in the other.... The two creeds are agreed in that which constitutes
the pith and kernel of both. The Father is God in his primeval essence. But God, as
manifested, is the Son.</q></q> Dr. Johnson adds: <q>So Martineau, after a lifelong service in
a Unitarian pulpit and professorship, at length publicly accepts for truth the substance
of that doctrine which, in common with the church, he has found so profitable, and
tells Unitarians that they and we alike worship the Son, because all that we know of
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
God was revealed by act of the Son.</q> After he had reached his eightieth year, Martineau
withdrew from the Unitarian body, though he never formally united with any
Trinitarian church.
</p>

<p>
H. C. Minton, in Princeton Rev., 1903:655-659, has quoted some of Martineau's most
significant utterances, such as the following: <q>The great strength of the orthodox
doctrine lies, no doubt, in the appeal it makes to the inward <q>sense of sin,</q>&mdash;that sad
weight whose burden oppresses every serious soul. And the great weakness of Unitarianism
has been its insensibility to this abiding sorrow of the human consciousness.
But the orthodox remedy is surely the most terrible of all mistakes, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>, <emph>to get rid</emph> of
the burden, by throwing it on Christ or permitting him to take it.... For myself I
own that the literature to which I turn for the nurture and inspiration of Faith, Hope
and Love is almost exclusively the product of orthodox versions of the Christian
religion. The Hymns of the Wesleys, the Prayers of the Friends, the Meditations of
Law and Tauler, have a quickening and elevating power which I rarely feel in the
books on our Unitarian shelves.... Yet I can less than ever appropriate, or even
intellectually excuse, any distinctive article of the Trinitarian scheme of salvation.</q>
</p>

<p>
Whiton, Gloria Patri, 23-26, seeks to reconcile the two forms of belief by asserting
that <q>both Trinitarians and Unitarians are coming to regard human nature as essentially
one with the divine. The Nicene Fathers builded better than they knew, when
they declared Christ <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>homoousios</foreign> with the Father. We assert the same of mankind.</q>
But here Whiton goes beyond the warrant of Scripture. Of none but the only begotten
Son can it be said that before Abraham was born he was, and that in him dwelleth
all the fulness of the Godhead bodily (<emph>John 8:57</emph>; <emph>Col. 2:9</emph>).
</p>

<p>
Unitarianism has repeatedly demonstrated its logical insufficiency by this <q>facilis
descensus Averno,</q> this lapse from theism into pantheism. In New England the high
Arianism of Channing degenerated into the half-fledged pantheism of Theodore Parker,
and the full-fledged pantheism of Ralph Waldo Emerson. Modern Judaism is pantheistic
in its philosophy, and such also was the later Arabic philosophy of Mohammedanism.
Single personality is felt to be insufficient to the mind's conception of Absolute
Perfection. We shrink from the thought of an eternally lonely God. <q>We take
refuge in the term <q>Godhead.</q> The literati find relief in speaking of <q>the gods.</q></q>
Twesten (translated in Bib. Sac., 3:502)&mdash;<q>There may be in polytheism an element of
truth, though disfigured and misunderstood. John of Damascus boasted that the
Christian Trinity stood midway between the abstract monotheism of the Jews and the
idolatrous polytheism of the Greeks.</q> Twesten, quoted in Shedd, Dogm. Theology,
1:255&mdash;<q>There is a πλήρωμα in God. Trinity does not contradict Unity, but only that
solitariness which is inconsistent with the living plenitude and blessedness ascribed to
God in Scripture, and which God possesses in himself and independently of the finite.</q>
Shedd himself remarks: <q>The attempt of the Deist and the Socinian to construct the
doctrine of divine <emph>Unity</emph> is a failure, because it fails to construct the doctrine of the
divine <emph>Personality</emph>. It contends by implication that God can be self-knowing as a
single subject merely, without an object; without the distinctions involved in the subject
contemplating, the object contemplated, and the perception of the identity of both.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 75&mdash;<q>God is no sterile and motionless unit.</q> Bp. Phillips
Brooks: <q>Unitarianism has got the notion of God as tight and individual as it is
possible to make it, and is dying of its meagre Deity.</q> Unitarianism is not the doctrine
of one God&mdash;for the Trinitarian holds to this; it is rather the unipersonality of this one
God. The divine nature demands either an eternal Christ or an eternal creation. Dr.
Calthorp, the Unitarian, of Syracuse, therefore consistently declares that <q>Nature and
God are the same.</q> It is the old worship of Baal and Ashtaroth&mdash;the deification of
power and pleasure. For <q>Nature</q> includes everything&mdash;all bad impulses as well as
good. When a man discovers gravity, he has not discovered God, but only one of the
manifestations of God.
</p>

<p>
Gordon, Christ of To-day, 112&mdash;<q>The supreme divinity of Jesus Christ is but the
sovereign expression in human history of the great law of difference in identity that
runs through the entire universe and that has its home in the heart of the Godhead.</q>
Even James Freeman Clarke, in his Orthodoxy, its Truths and Errors, 436, admits that
<q>there is an essential truth hidden in the idea of the Trinity. While the church doctrine,
in every form which it has taken, has failed to satisfy the human intellect, the
human heart has clung to the substance contained in them all.</q> William Adams
Brown: <q>If God is by nature love, he must be by nature social. Fatherhood and Sonship
must be immanent in him. In him the limitations of finite personality are
removed.</q> But Dr. Brown wrongly adds: <q>Not the mysteries of God's being, as he is
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
in himself, but as he is revealed, are opened to us in this doctrine.</q> Similarly P. S.
Moxom: <q>I do not know how it is possible to predicate any moral quality of a person
who is absolutely out of relation to other persons. If God were conceived of as solitary
in the universe, he could not be characterized as righteous.</q> But Dr. Moxom erroneously
thinks that these other moral personalities must be outside of God. We maintain
that righteousness, like love, requires only plurality of persons within the
God-head. See Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 1:105, 156. For the pantheistic
view, see Strauss, Glaubenslehre, 1:462-524.
</p>

<p>
W. L. Walker, Christian Theism, 317, quotes Dr. Paul Carus, Primer of Philosophy,
101&mdash;<q>We cannot even conceive of God without attributing trinity to him. An absolute
unity would be non-existence. God, if thought of as real and active, involves
an antithesis, which may be formulated as God and World, or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>natura naturans</foreign> and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>natura naturata</foreign>, or in some other way. This antithesis implies already the trinity-conception.
When we think of God, not only as that which is eternal and immutable in
existence, but also as that which changes, grows, and evolves, we cannot escape the result
and we must progress to a triune God-idea. The conception of a God-man, of a Savior,
of God revealed in evolution, brings out the antithesis of God Father and God Son, and
the very conception of this relation implies God the Spirit that proceeds from both.</q>
This confession of an economic Trinity is a rational one only as it implies a Trinity
immanent and eternal.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. It is essential to any proper revelation.
</p>

<p>
If there be no Trinity, Christ is not God, and cannot perfectly know or
reveal God. Christianity is no longer the one, all-inclusive, and final revelation,
but only one of many conflicting and competing systems, each of
which has its portion of truth, but also its portion of error. So too with
the Holy Spirit. <q>As God can be revealed only through God, so also can
he be appropriated only through God. If the Holy Spirit be not God,
then the love and self-communication of God to the human soul are not a
reality.</q> In other words, without the doctrine of the Trinity we go back
to mere natural religion and the far-off God of deism,&mdash;and this is ultimately
exchanged for pantheism in the way already mentioned.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Martensen, Dogmatics, 104; Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 156. If Christ be
not God, he cannot perfectly know himself, and his testimony to himself has no independent
authority. In prayer the Christian has practical evidence of the Trinity, and
can see the value of the doctrine; for he comes to God the Father, pleading the name
of Christ, and taught how to pray aright by the Holy Spirit. It is impossible to identify
the Father with either the Son or the Spirit. See <emph>Rom. 8:27&mdash;<q rend='pre'>he that searcheth the hearts</q></emph>
[<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, God] <emph><q rend='post'>knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of
God.</q></emph> See also Godet on <emph>John 1:18&mdash;<q>No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, who is in the
bosom of the Father, he hath declared him</q></emph>; notice here the relation between ὁ ὤν and ἐξηγήσατο.
Napoleon I: <q>Christianity says with simplicity, <q>No man hath seen God, except God.</q></q>
<emph>John 16:15&mdash;<q>All things whatsoever the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he taketh of mine, and shall declare it
unto you</q></emph>; here Christ claims for himself all that belongs to God, and then declares that
the Holy Spirit shall reveal him. Only a divine Spirit can do this, even as only a divine
Christ can put out an unpresumptuous hand to take all that belongs to the Father.
See also Westcott, on <emph>John 14:9&mdash;<q>he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; how sayest thou, Show us the
Father?</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
The agnostic is perfectly correct in his conclusions, if there be no Christ, no medium
of communication, no principle of revelation in the Godhead. Only the Son has revealed
the Father. Even Royce, in his Spirit of Modern Philosophy, speaks of the existence
of an infinite Self, or Logos, or World-mind, of which all individual minds are parts or
bits, and of whose timeless choice we partake. Some such principle in the divine
nature must be assumed, if Christianity is the complete and sufficient revelation of
God's will to men. The Unitarian view regards the religion of Christ as only <q>one of
the day's works of humanity</q>&mdash;an evanescent moment in the ceaseless advance of the
race. The Christian on the other hand regards Christ as the only Revealer of God, the
only God with whom we have to do, the final authority in religion, the source of all
truth and the judge of all mankind. <emph><q>Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
away</q> (Mat. 24:35).</emph> The resurrection of just and unjust shall be his work (<emph>John 5:28</emph>), and
future retribution shall be <emph><q>the wrath of the Lamb</q> (Rev. 6:16)</emph>. Since God never thinks, says,
or does any thing, except through Christ, and since Christ does his work in human
hearts only through the Holy Spirit, we may conclude that the doctrine of the Trinity
is essential to any proper revelation.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
C. It is essential to any proper redemption.
</p>

<p>
If God be absolutely and simply one, there can be no mediation or atonement,
since between God and the most exalted creature the gulf is infinite.
Christ cannot bring us nearer to God than he is himself. Only one who is
God can reconcile us to God. So, too, only one who is God can purify our
souls. A God who is only unity, but in whom is no plurality, may be our
Judge, but, so far as we can see, cannot be our Savior or our Sanctifier.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>God is the way to himself.</q> <q>Nothing human holds good before God, and nothing
but God himself can satisfy God.</q> The best method of arguing with Unitarians, therefore,
is to rouse the sense of sin; for the soul that has any proper conviction of its sins
feels that only an infinite Redeemer can ever save it. On the other hand, a slight estimate
of sin is logically connected with a low view of the dignity of Christ. Twesten,
translated in Bib. Sac., 3:510&mdash;<q>It would seem to be not a mere accident that Pelagianism,
when logically carried out, as for example among the Socinians, has also always
led to Unitarianism.</q> In the reverse order, too, it is manifest that rejection of the
deity of Christ must tend to render more superficial men's views of the sin and guilt
and punishment from which Christ came to save them, and with this to deaden religious
feeling and to cut the sinews of all evangelistic and missionary effort (<emph>John 12:44</emph>; <emph>Heb.
10:26</emph>). See Arthur, on the Divinity of our Lord in relation to his work of Atonement,
in Present Day Tracts, 6: no. 35; Ellis, quoted by Watson, Theol. Inst., 23; Gunsaulus,
Transfig. of Christ, 13&mdash;<q>We have tried to see God in the light of nature, while he said:
<emph><q>In thy light shall we see light</q> (Ps. 36:9)</emph>.</q> We should see nature in the light of Christ. Eternal
life is attained only through the knowledge of God in Christ (<emph>John 16:9</emph>). Hence to
accept Christ is to accept God; to reject Christ is to turn one's back on God: <emph>John 12:44&mdash;<q>He
that believeth on me, believeth not on me, but on him that sent me</q></emph>; <emph>Heb. 10:26, 29&mdash;<q rend='pre'>there remaineth no
more a sacrifice for sin</q></emph> ... [for him] <emph><q rend='post'>who hath trodden under foot the Son of God.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
In The Heart of Midlothian, Jeanie Deans goes to London to secure pardon for her
sister. She cannot in her peasant attire go direct to the King, for he will not receive
her. She goes to a Scotch housekeeper in London; through him to the Duke of Argyle;
through him to the Queen; through the Queen she gets pardon from the King, whom
she never sees. This was mediæval mediatorship. But now we come directly to Christ,
and this suffices us, because he is himself God (The Outlook). A man once went into
the cell of a convicted murderer, at the request of the murderer's wife and pleaded
with him to confess his crime and accept Christ, but the murderer refused. The seeming
clergyman was the Governor, with a pardon which he had designed to bestow in
case he found the murderer penitent. A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 86&mdash;<q>I have
heard that, during our Civil War, a swaggering, drunken, blaspheming officer insulted
and almost drove from the dock at Alexandria, a plain unoffending man in citizen's
dress; but I have also heard that that same officer turned pale, fell on his knees, and
begged for mercy, when the plain man demanded his sword, put him under arrest and
made himself known as General Grant. So we may abuse and reject the Lord Jesus
Christ, and fancy that we can ignore his claims and disobey his commands with
impunity; but it will seem a more serious thing when we find at the last that he whom
we have abused and rejected is none other than the living God before whose judgment
bar we are to stand.</q>
</p>

<p>
Henry B. Smith began life under Unitarian influences, and had strong prejudices
against evangelical doctrine, especially the doctrines of human depravity and of the
divinity of Christ. In his Senior year in College he was converted. Cyrus Hamlin
says: <q>I regard Smith's conversion as the most remarkable event in College in my
day.</q> Doubts of depravity vanished with one glimpse into his own heart; and doubts
about Christ's divinity could not hold their own against the confession: <q>Of one thing
I feel assured: I need an infinite Savior.</q> Here is the ultimate strength of Trinitarian
doctrine. When the Holy Spirit convinces a man of his sin, and brings him face to
face with the outraged holiness and love of God, he is moved to cry from the depths of
his soul: <q>None but an infinite Savior can ever save me!</q> Only in a divine Christ&mdash;Christ
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
<emph>for</emph> us upon the Cross, and Christ <emph>in</emph> us by his Spirit&mdash;can the convicted soul find
peace and rest. And so every revival of true religion gives a new impulse to the Trinitarian
doctrine. Henry B. Smith wrote in his later life: <q>When the doctrine of the
Trinity was abandoned, other articles of the faith, such as the atonement and regeneration,
have almost always followed, by logical necessity, as, when one draws the wire
from a necklace of gems, the gems all fall asunder.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
D. It is essential to any proper model for human life.
</p>

<p>
If there be no Trinity immanent in the divine nature, then Fatherhood
in God has had a beginning and it may have an end; Sonship, moreover,
is no longer a perfection, but an imperfection, ordained for a temporary
purpose. But if fatherly giving and filial receiving are eternal in God,
then the law of love requires of us conformity to God in both these respects
as the highest dignity of our being.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
See Hutton, Essays, 1:232&mdash;<q>The Trinity tells us something of God's absolute and
essential nature; not simply what he is <emph>to us</emph>, but what he is <emph>in himself</emph>. If Christ is the
eternal Son of the Father, God is indeed and in essence a Father; the social nature, the
spring of love is of the very essence of the eternal Being; the communication of life,
the reciprocation of affection dates from beyond time, belongs to the very being of God.
The Unitarian idea of a solitary God profoundly affects our conception of God, reduces
it to mere power, identifies God with abstract cause and thought. Love is grounded
in power, not power in love. The Father is merged in the omniscient and omnipotent
genius of the universe.</q> Hence <emph>1 John 2:23&mdash;<q>Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father.</q></emph>
D'Arcy, Idealism and Theology, 204&mdash;<q>If God be simply one great person, then we
have to think of him as waiting until the whole process of creation has been accomplished
before his love can find an object upon which to bestow itself. His love belongs,
in that case, not to his inmost essence, but to his relation to some of his creatures. The
words <emph><q>God is love</q> (1 John 4:8)</emph> become a rhetorical exaggeration, rather than the expression
of a truth about the divine nature.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hutton, Essays, 1:239&mdash;<q>We need also the inspiration and help of a perfect filial
will. We cannot conceive of the Father as sharing in that dependent attitude of spirit
which is our chief spiritual want. It is a Father's perfection to originate&mdash;a Son's to
receive. We need sympathy and aid in this <emph>receptive</emph> life; hence, the help of the true
Son. Humility, self-sacrifice, submission, are heavenly, eternal, divine. Christ's filial
life to the root of all filial life in us. See <emph>Gal. 2:19, 20&mdash;<q>it is no longer I that live, but Christ liveth
in me: and that life which I now live in the flesh I live in faith, the faith which is in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave
himself up for me.</q></emph></q> Thomas Erskine of Linlathen, The Spiritual Order, 233&mdash;<q>There is
nothing degrading in this dependence, for we share it with the eternal Son.</q> Gore,
Incarnation, 162&mdash;<q>God can limit himself by the conditions of manhood, because the
Godhead contains in itself eternally the prototype of human self-sacrifice and self-limitation,
for God is love.</q> On the practical lessons and uses of the doctrine of the
Trinity, see Presb. and Ref. Rev., Oct 1902:524-550&mdash;art. by R. M. Edgar; also sermon
by Ganse, in South Church Lectures, 300-310. On the doctrine in general, see Robie, in
Bib. Sac., 27:262-289; Pease, Philosophy of Trinitarian Doctrine; N. W. Taylor, Revealed
Theology, 1:133; Schultz, Lehre von der Gottheit Christi.
</p>

<p>
On heathen trinities, see Bib. Repos., 6:116; Christlieb, Mod. Doubt and Christian
Belief, 266, 267&mdash;<q>Lao-tse says, 600 B. C., <q>Tao, the intelligent principle of all being, is
by nature one; the first begat the second; both together begat the third; these three
made all things.</q></q> The Egyptian triad of Abydos was Osiris, Isis his wife, and Horus
their Son. But these were no true persons; for not only did the Son proceed from the
Father, but the Father proceeded from the Son; the Egyptian trinity was pantheistic
in its meaning. See Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, 29; Rawlinson, Religions of the Ancient
World, 46, 47. The Trinity of the Vedas was Dyaus, Indra, Agni. Derived from the
three dimensions of space? Or from the family&mdash;father, mother, son? Man creates
God in his own image, and sees family life in the Godhead?
</p>

<p>
The Brahman Trimurti or Trinity, to the members of which are given the names
Brahma, Vishnu, Siva&mdash;source, supporter, end&mdash;is a personification of the pantheistic
All, which dwells equally in good and evil, in god and man. The three are represented
in the three mystic letters of the syllable <foreign lang='sa' rend='italic'>Om</foreign>, or <foreign lang='sa' rend='italic'>Aum</foreign>, and by the image at Elephanta
of three heads and one body; see Hardwick, Christ and Other Masters, 1:276. The
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
places of the three are interchangeable. Williams: <q>In the three persons the one God
is shown; Each first in place, each last, not one alone; Of Siva, Vishnu, Brahma, each
may be, First, second, third, among the blessed three.</q> There are ten incarnations of
Vishnu for men's salvation in various times of need; and the one Spirit which temporarily
invests itself with the qualities of matter is reduced to its original essence at the
end of the æon (Kalpa). This is only a grosser form of Sabellianism, or of a modal
Trinity. According to Renouf it is not older than A. D. 1400. Buddhism in later times
had its triad. Buddha, or Intelligence, the first principle, associated with Dharma,
or Law, the principle of matter, through the combining influence of Sangha, or Order,
the mediating principle. See Kellogg, The Light of Asia and the Light of the World,
184, 355. It is probably from a Christian source.
</p>

<p>
The Greek trinity was composed of Zeus, Athena, and Apollo. Apollo or Loxias
(λόγος) utters the decisions of Zeus. <q>These three surpass all the other gods in moral
character and in providential care over the universe. They sustain such intimate and
endearing relations to each other, that they may be said to <q>agree in one</q></q>; see Tyler,
Theol. of Greek Poets, 170, 171; Gladstone, Studies of Homer, vol. 2, sec. 2. Yet the
Greek trinity, while it gives us three persons, does not give us oneness of essence. It
is a system of tritheism. Plotinus, 300 A. D., gives us a philosophical Trinity in his τὸ
ἔν, ὁ νοῦς, ἡ ψυχή.
</p>

<p>
Watts, New Apologetic, 195&mdash;The heathen trinities are <q>residuary fragments of the
lost knowledge of God, not different stages in a process of theological evolution, but
evidence of a moral and spiritual degradation.</q> John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity,
92&mdash;<q>In the Vedas the various individual divinities are separated by no hard and
fast distinction from each other. They are only names for one indivisible whole, of
which the particular divinity invoked at any one time is the type or representative.
There is a latent recognition of a unity beneath all the multiplicity of the objects of
adoration. The personal or anthropomorphic element is never employed as it is in the
Greek and Roman mythology. The personality ascribed to Mitra or Varuna or Indra
or Agni is scarcely more real than our modern smiling heaven or whispering breeze or
sullen moaning restless sea. <q>There is but one,</q> they say, <q>though the poets call him by
different names.</q> The all-embracing heaven, mighty nature, is the reality behind each of
these partial manifestations. The pantheistic element which was implicit in the Vedic
phase of Indian religion becomes explicit in Brahmanism, and in particular in the so-called
Indian systems of philosophy and in the great Indian epic poems. They seek
to find in the flux and variety of things the permanent underlying essence. That is
Brahma. So Spinoza sought rest in the one eternal substance, and he wished to look at
all things <q>under the form of eternity.</q> All things and beings are forms of one whole,
of the infinite substance which we call God.</q> See also L. L. Paine, Ethnic Trinities.
</p>

<p>
The gropings of the heathen religions after a trinity in God, together with their
inability to construct a consistent scheme of it, are evidence of a rational want in
human nature which only the Christian doctrine is able to supply. This power to satisfy
the inmost needs of the believer is proof of its truth. We close our treatment with
the words of Jeremy Taylor: <q>He who goes about to speak of the mystery of the
Trinity, and does it by words and names of man's invention, talking of essence and
existences, hypostases and personalities, priority in coëquality, and unity in pluralities,
may amuse himself and build a tabernacle in his head, and talk something&mdash;he
knows not what; but the renewed man, that feels the power of the Father, to whom
the Son is become wisdom, sanctification, and redemption, in whose heart the love of
the Spirit of God is shed abroad&mdash;this man, though he understand nothing of what is
unintelligible, yet he alone truly understands the Christian doctrine of the Trinity.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. The Decrees Of God.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Definition of Decrees.</head>

<p>
By the decrees of God we mean that eternal plan by which God has
rendered certain all the events of the universe, past, present, and future.
Notice in explanation that:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The decrees are many only to our finite comprehension; in their
own nature they are but one plan, which embraces not only effects but also
causes, not only the ends to be secured but also the means needful to
secure them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In <emph>Rom. 8:28&mdash;<q>called according to his purpose</q></emph>&mdash;the many decrees for the salvation of many
individuals are represented as forming but one purpose of God. <emph>Eph. 1:11&mdash;<q>foreordained
according to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his will</q></emph>&mdash;notice again the word
<q><emph>purpose</emph>,</q> in the singular. <emph>Eph. 3:11&mdash;<q>according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our
Lord.</q></emph> This one purpose or plan of God includes both means and ends, prayer and its
answer, labor and its fruit. Tyrolese proverb: <q>God has his plan for every man.</q>
Every man, as well as Jean Paul, is <q>der Einzige</q>&mdash;the unique. There is a single plan
which embraces all things; <q>we use the word <q>decree</q> when we think of it partitively</q>
(Pepper). See Hodge, Outlines of Theology, 1st ed., 165; 2d ed., 200&mdash;<q>In fact, no event
is isolated&mdash;to determine one involves determination of the whole concatenation of
causes and effects which constitutes the universe.</q> The word <q>plan</q> is preferable to
the word <q>decrees,</q> because <q>plan</q> excludes the ideas of (1) plurality, (2) short-sightedness,
(3) arbitrariness, (4) compulsion.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The decrees, as the eternal act of an infinitely perfect will, though
they have logical relations to each other, have no chronological relation.
They are not therefore the result of deliberation, in any sense that implies
short-sightedness or hesitancy.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Logically, in God's decree the sun precedes the sunlight, and the decree to bring into
being a father precedes the decree that there shall be a son. God decrees man before
he decrees man's act; he decrees the creation of man before he decrees man's existence.
But there is no chronological succession. <q><emph>Counsel</emph></q> in <emph>Eph. 1:11&mdash;<q>the counsel of his will</q></emph>&mdash;means,
not deliberation, but wisdom.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) Since the will in which the decrees have their origin is a free will,
the decrees are not a merely instinctive or necessary exercise of the divine
intelligence or volition, such as pantheism supposes.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It belongs to the perfection of God that he have a plan, and the best possible plan.
Here is no necessity, but only the certainty that infinite wisdom will act wisely. God's
decrees are not God; they are not identical with his essence; they do not flow from
his being in the same necessary way in which the eternal Son proceeds from the eternal
Father. There is free will in God, which acts with infinite certainty, yet without necessity.
To call even the decree of salvation necessary is to deny grace, and to make an
unfree God. See Dick, Lectures on Theology, 1:355; lect. 34.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) The decrees have reference to things outside of God. God does not
decree to be holy, nor to exist as three persons in one essence.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Decrees are the preparation for external events&mdash;the embracing of certain things
and acts in a plan. They do not include those processes and operations within the Godhead
which have no reference to the universe.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) The decrees primarily respect the acts of God himself, in Creation,
Providence, and Grace; secondarily, the acts of free creatures, which he
foresees will result therefrom.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
While we deny the assertion of Whedon, that <q>the divine plan embraces <emph>only</emph> divine
actions,</q> we grant that God's plan has reference <emph>primarily</emph> to his own actions, and that
the sinful acts of men, in particular, are the objects, not of a decree that God will
efficiently produce them, but of a decree that God will permit men, in the exercise of
their own free will, to produce them.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>f</hi>) The decree to act is not the act. The decrees are an internal exercise
and manifestation of the divine attributes, and are not to be confounded
with Creation, Providence, and Redemption, which are the execution of the
decrees.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The decrees are the first operation of the attributes, and the first manifestation of
personality of which we have any knowledge within the Godhead. They presuppose
those essential acts or movements within the divine nature which we call generation
and procession. They involve by way of consequence that execution of the decrees
which we call Creation, Providence, and Redemption, but they are not to be confounded
with either of these.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>g</hi>) The decrees are therefore not addressed to creatures; are not of the
nature of statute law; and lay neither compulsion nor obligation upon the
wills of men.
</p>

<p>
So ordering the universe that men <emph>will</emph> pursue a given course of action is a very
different thing from declaring, ordering, or commanding that they <emph>shall</emph>. <q>Our acts
are in accordance with the decrees, but not <emph>necessarily</emph> so&mdash;we <emph>can</emph> do otherwise and
often <emph>should</emph></q> (Park). The Frenchman who fell into the water and cried: <q>I will,
drown,&mdash;no one shall help me!</q> was very naturally permitted to drown; if he had
said: <q>I shall drown,&mdash;no one will help me!</q> he might perchance have called some
friendly person to his aid.
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>h</hi>) All human acts, whether evil or good, enter into the divine plan and
so are objects of God's decrees, although God's actual agency with regard
to the evil is only a permissive agency.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
No decree of God reads: <q>You shall sin.</q> For (1) no decree is addressed to <emph>you</emph>;
(2) no decree with respect to you says <emph>shall</emph>; (3) God cannot cause <emph>sin</emph>, or decree to
cause it. He simply decrees to create, and himself to act, in such a way that you will,
of your own free choice, commit sin. God determines upon his own acts, foreseeing
what the results will be in the free acts of his creatures, and so he determines those
results. This permissive decree is the only decree of God with respect to sin. Man of
himself is capable of producing sin. Of himself he is not capable of producing holiness.
In the production of holiness two powers must concur, God's will and man's will, and
God's will must act first. The decree of good, therefore, is not simply a permissive
decree, as in the case of evil. God's decree, in the former case, is a decree to bring to
bear positive agencies for its production, such as circumstances, motives, influences of
his Spirit. But, in the case of evil, God's decrees are simply his arrangement that man
may do as he pleases, God all the while foreseeing the result.
</p>

<p>
Permissive agency should not be confounded with conditional agency, nor permissive
decree with conditional decree. God foreordained sin only indirectly. The machine
is constructed not for the sake of the friction, but in spite of it. In the parable <emph>Mat.
13:24-30</emph>, the question <q><emph>Whence then hath it tares?</emph></q> is answered, not by saying, <q>I decreed the
tares.</q> but by saying: <q><emph>An enemy hath done this</emph>.</q> Yet we must take exception to Principal
Fairbairn, Place of Christ in Theology, 456, when he says: <q>God did not <emph>permit</emph> sin to
be; it is, in its essence, the transgression of his law, and so his only attitude toward it
is one of opposition. It <emph>is</emph>, because man has contradicted and resisted his will.</q> Here
the truth of God's opposition to sin is stated so sharply as almost to deny the decree of
sin in any sense. We maintain that God does decree sin in the sense of embracing in
his plan the foreseen transgressions of men, while at the same time we maintain that
these foreseen transgressions are chargeable wholly to men and not at all to God.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>i</hi>) While God's total plan with regard to creatures is called predestination,
or foreordination, his purpose so to act that certain will believe and
be saved is called election, and his purpose so to act that certain will refuse
to believe and be lost is called reprobation. We discuss election and reprobation,
in a later chapter, as a part of the Application of Redemption.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
God's decrees may be divided into decrees with respect to nature, and decrees with
respect to moral beings. These last we call foreordination, or predestination; and of
these decrees with respect to moral beings there are two kinds, the decree of election,
and the decree of reprobation; see our treatment of the doctrine of Election. George
Herbert: <q>We all acknowledge both thy power and love To be exact, transcendent,
and divine; Who dost so strongly and so sweetly move. While all things have their will&mdash;yet
none but thine. For either thy <emph>command</emph> or thy <emph>permission</emph> Lays hands on all;
they are thy right and left. The first puts on with speed and expedition; The other
curbs sin's stealing pace and theft. Nothing escapes them both; all must appear And
be disposed and dressed and tuned by thee Who sweetly temperest all. If we could
hear Thy skill and art, what music it would be!</q> On the whole doctrine, see Shedd,
Presb. and Ref. Rev., Jan. 1890:1-25.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Proof of the Doctrine of Decrees.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. From Scripture.</head>

<p>
A. The Scriptures declare that all things are included in the divine
decrees. B. They declare that special things and events are decreed; as,
for example, (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) the stability of the physical universe; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the outward
circumstances of nations; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the length of human life; (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) the mode of
our death; (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) the free acts of men, both good acts and evil acts. C.
They declare that God has decreed (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) the salvation of believers; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the
establishment of Christ's kingdom; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) the work of Christ and of his
people in establishing it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
A. <emph>Is. 14:26, 27&mdash;<q>This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth; and this is the hand that is stretched
out upon all the nations; for Jehovah of hosts hath purposed ... and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?</q></emph>
<emph>46:10, 11&mdash;<q>declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying,
My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure ... yea, I have spoken, I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed,
I will also do it.</q></emph> <emph>Dan. 4:35&mdash;<q>doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants
of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?</q></emph> <emph>Eph. 1:11&mdash;<q>the purpose of him who
worketh all things after the counsel of his will.</q></emph>
</p>

<p>
B. (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <emph>Ps. 119:89-91&mdash;<q>For ever, O Jehovah, thy word is settled in heaven. Thy faithfulness is unto all generations:
Thou hast established the earth and it abideth. They abide this day according to thine ordinances; For all things
are thy servants.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <emph>Acts 17:26&mdash;<q>he made of one every nation of men to dwell on all the face of the earth, having
determined their appointed seasons, and the bounds of their habitation</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>Zach. 5:1&mdash;<q>came four chariots out from
between two mountains; and the mountains were mountains of brass</q></emph>&mdash;the fixed decrees from which proceed
God's providential dealings? (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) <emph>Job 14:5&mdash;<q>Seeing his days are determined, The number of his
months is with thee, And thou hast determined his bounds that he cannot pass.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) <emph>John 21:19&mdash;<q>this he spake,
signifying by what manner of death he should glorify God.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) Good acts: <emph>Is. 44:28&mdash;<q>that saith of Cyrus,
He is my shepherd and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying of Jerusalem, She shall be built; and of the temple, Thy
foundation shall be laid</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 2:10&mdash;<q>For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God
afore prepared that we should walk in them.</q></emph> Evil acts: <emph>Gen. 50:20&mdash;<q>as for you, ye meant evil against me; but
God meant it for good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive</q></emph>; <emph>1 K. 12:15&mdash;<q>So the king
hearkened not unto the people, for it was a thing brought about of Jehovah</q></emph>; <emph>24&mdash;<q>for this thing is of me</q></emph>; <emph>Luke 22:23&mdash;<q>For
the Son of man indeed goeth, as it hath been determined: but woe unto that man through whom he is betrayed</q></emph>;
<emph>Acts 2:23&mdash;<q>him, being delivered up by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye by the hand of lawless
men did crucify and slay</q></emph>; <emph>4:27, 28&mdash;<q>of a truth in this city against thy holy Servant Jesus, who thou didst anoint,
both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, were gathered together, to do whatsoever thy
hand and thy counsel foreordained to come to pass</q></emph>; <emph>Rom. 9:17&mdash;<q>For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, For this very
purpose did I raise thee up, that I might show in thee my power</q></emph>; <emph>1 Pet 2:3&mdash;<q>They stumble at the word, being disobedient:
whereunto also they were appointed</q></emph>; <emph>Rev. 17:17&mdash;<q>For God did put in their hearts to do his mind, and to come
to one mind, and to give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God should be accomplished.</q></emph>
</p>

<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>

<p>
C. (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <emph>1 Cor. 2:7&mdash;<q>the wisdom which hath been hidden, which God foreordained before the worlds unto our
glory</q></emph>; <emph>Eph 3:10, 11&mdash;<q>manifold wisdom of God, according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus
our lord.</q></emph> <emph>Ephesians 1</emph> is a pæan in praise of God's decrees. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The greatest decree of all
is the decree to give the world to Christ. <emph>Ps. 2:7, 8&mdash;<q>I will tell of the decree:... I will give thee
the nations for thine inheritance</q></emph>; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <emph>verse 6&mdash;<q>I have set my king Upon my holy hill of Zion</q></emph>; <emph>1 Cor. 15:25&mdash;<q>he
must reign, till he hath put all his enemies under his feet.</q></emph> (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) This decree we are to convert into our
decree; God's will is to be executed through our wills. <emph>Phil. 2:12, 13&mdash;<q>work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God who worketh in you both to will and to work, for his good pleasure.</q></emph> <emph>Rev.
5:1, 7&mdash;<q rend='pre'>I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book written within and on the back, close sealed
with seven seals.... And he</q></emph> [the Lamb] <emph><q rend='post'>came, and he taketh it out of the right hand of him that sat on the
throne</q></emph>; <emph>verse 9&mdash;<q>Worthy art thou to take the book, and to open the seals thereof</q></emph>&mdash;Christ alone has the
omniscience to know, and the omnipotence to execute, the divine decrees. When John
weeps because there is none in heaven or earth to loose the seals and to read the book
of God's decrees, the Lion of the tribe of Judah prevails to open it. Only Christ conducts
the course of history to its appointed end. See A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation,
268-283, on The Decree of God as the Great Encouragement to Missions.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. From Reason.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. From the Divine Foreknowledge.</head>

<p>
Foreknowledge implies fixity, and fixity implies decree.&mdash;From eternity
God foresaw all the events of the universe as fixed and certain. This fixity
and certainty could not have had its ground either in blind fate or in the
variable wills of men, since neither of these had an existence. It could
have had its ground in nothing outside the divine mind, for in eternity
nothing existed besides the divine mind. But for this fixity there must
have been a cause; if anything in the future was fixed, something must
have fixed it. This fixity could have had its ground only in the plan and
purpose of God. In fine, if God foresaw the future as certain, it must have
been because there was something in himself which made it certain; or, in
other words, because he had decreed it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We object therefore to the statement of E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 74&mdash;<q>God's
knowledge and God's purposes both being eternal, one cannot be conceived as
the ground of the other, nor can either be predicated to the exclusion of the other as
the cause of things, but, correlative and eternal, they must be coequal quantities in
thought.</q> We reply that while decree does not chronologically precede, it does
logically precede, foreknowledge. Foreknowledge is not of possible events, but of what
is certain to be. The certainty of future events which God foreknew could have had
its ground only in his decree, since he alone existed to be the ground and explanation
of this certainty. Events were fixed only because God had fixed them. Shedd, Dogm.
Theol., 1:397&mdash;<q>An event must be <emph>made</emph> certain, before it can be <emph>known</emph> as a certain
event.</q> Turretin, Inst. Theol., loc. 3, quaes. 12, 18&mdash;<q>Præcipuum fundamentum scientiæ
divinæ circa futura contingentia est deoretum solum.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Decreeing creation implies decreeing the foreseen results of creation.&mdash;To
meet the objection that God might have foreseen the events of the universe,
not because he had decreed each one, but only because he had
decreed to create the universe and institute its laws, we may put the argument
in another form. In eternity there could have been no cause of the
future existence of the universe, outside of God himself, since no being
existed but God himself. In eternity God foresaw that the creation of the
world and the institution of its laws would make certain its actual history
even to the most insignificant details. But God decreed to create and to
institute these laws. In so decreeing he necessarily decreed all that was
to come. In fine, God foresaw the future events of the universe as certain,
because he had decreed to create; but this determination to create involved
also a determination of all the actual results of that creation; or, in other
words, God decreed those results.
</p>

<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 84&mdash;<q>The existence of divine decrees may be
inferred from the existence of natural law.</q> Law = certainty = God's will. Positivists
express great contempt for the doctrine of the eternal purpose of God, yet they consign
us to the iron necessity of physical forces and natural laws. Dr. Robinson also
points out that decrees are <q>implied in the prophecies. We cannot conceive that all
events should have converged toward the one great event&mdash;the death of Christ&mdash;without
the intervention of an eternal purpose.</q> E. H. Johnson, Outline Syst. Theol., 2d
ed., 251, note&mdash;<q>Reason is confronted by the paradox that the divine decrees are at once
absolute and conditional; the resolution of the paradox is that God absolutely decreed
a conditional system&mdash;a system, however, the workings of which he thoroughly foreknows.</q>
The rough unhewn stone and the statue into which it will be transformed
are both and equally included in the plan of the sculptor.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
No undecreed event can be foreseen.&mdash;We grant that God decrees primarily
and directly his own acts of creation, providence, and grace; but
we claim that this involves also a secondary and indirect decreeing of the
acts of free creatures which he foresees will result therefrom. There is
therefore no such thing in God as <foreign  lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia media</foreign>, or knowledge of an
event that is to be, though it does not enter into the divine plan; for to say
that God foresees an undecreed event, is to say that he views as future an
event that is merely possible; or, in other words, that he views an event
not as it is.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We recognize only two kinds of knowledge: (1) Knowledge of undecreed possibles,
and (2) foreknowledge of decreed actuals. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Scientia media</foreign> is a supposed intermediate
knowledge between these two, namely (3) foreknowledge of undecreed actuals. See
further explanations below. We deny the existence of this third sort of knowledge.
We hold that sin is decreed in the sense of being <emph>rendered certain</emph> by God's determining
upon a system in which it was foreseen that sin would exist. The sin of man can
be foreknown, while yet God is not the immediate cause of it. God knows possibilities,
without having decreed them at all. But God cannot foreknow actualities unless he
has by his decree made them to be certainties of the future. He cannot foreknow that
which is not there to be foreknown. Royce, World and Individual, 2:374, maintains
that God has, not <emph>fore</emph>knowledge, but only <emph>eternal</emph> knowledge, of temporal things. But
we reply that to foreknow how a moral being <emph>will</emph> act is no more impossible than to
know how a moral being in given circumstances <emph>would</emph> act.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Only knowledge of that which is decreed is foreknowledge.&mdash;Knowledge
of a plan as ideal or possible may precede decree; but knowledge of a plan
as actual or fixed must follow decree. Only the latter knowledge is
properly <emph>fore</emph>knowledge. God therefore foresees creation, causes, laws,
events, consequences, because he has decreed creation, causes, laws, events,
consequences; that is, because he has embraced all these in his plan. The
denial of decrees logically involves the denial of God's foreknowledge of
free human actions; and to this Socinians, and some Arminians, are
actually led.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
An Arminian example of this denial is found in McCabe, Foreknowledge of God, and
Divine Nescience of Future Contingencies a Necessity. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see notes on God's
foreknowledge, in this Compendium, pages 283-286. Pepper: <q>Divine volition stands
logically between two divisions and kinds of divine knowledge.</q> God knew free
human actions as <emph>possible</emph>, <emph>before</emph> he decreed them; he knew them as <emph>future</emph>, <emph>because</emph>
he decreed them. Logically, though not chronologically, decree comes before foreknowledge.
When I say, <q>I know what I will do,</q> it is evident that I have determined
already, and that my knowledge does not precede determination, but follows it and is
based upon it. It is therefore not correct to say that God foreknows his decrees. It
is more true to say that he decrees his foreknowledge. He foreknows the future which
he has decreed, and he foreknows it because he has decreed it. His decrees are eternal,
and nothing that is eternal can be the object of foreknowledge. G. F. Wright, in Bib.
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
Sac., 1877:723&mdash;<q>The <emph>knowledge</emph> of God comprehended the details and incidents of
every possible plan. The <emph>choice</emph> of a plan made his knowledge determinate as <emph>fore</emph>knowledge.</q>
</p>

<p>
There are therefore two kinds of divine knowledge: (1) knowledge of what may be&mdash;of
the possible (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia simplicis intelligentiæ</foreign>); and (2) knowledge of what is, and is
to be, because God has decreed it (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia visionis</foreign>). Between these two Molina, the
Spanish Jesuit, wrongly conceived that there was (3) a middle knowledge of things
which were to be, although God had not decreed them (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia media</foreign>). This would of
course be a knowledge which God derived, not from himself, but from his creatures!
See Dick, Theology, 1:351. A. S. Carman: <q>It is difficult to see how God's knowledge
can be caused from eternity by something that has no existence until a definite point
of time.</q> If it be said that what is to be will be <q>in the nature of things,</q> we reply
that there is no <q>nature of things</q> apart from God, and that the ground of the objective
certainty, as well as of the subjective certitude corresponding to it, is to be found
only in God himself.
</p>

<p>
But God's decreeing to create, when he foresees that certain free acts of men will
follow, is a decreeing of those free acts, in the only sense in which we use the word
decreeing, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>, a rendering certain, or embracing in his plan. No Arminian who
believes in God's foreknowledge of free human acts has good reason for denying God's
decrees as thus explained. Surely God did not foreknow that Adam would exist and
sin, whether God determined to create him or not. Omniscience, then, becomes <emph>fore</emph>knowledge
only on condition of God's decree. That God's foreknowledge of free acts is
intuitive does not affect this conclusion. We grant that, while man can predict free
action only so far as it is rational (<hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, in the line of previously dominant motive), God
can predict free action whether it is rational or not. But even God cannot predict
what is not certain to be. God can have intuitive foreknowledge of free human acts
only upon condition of his own decree to create; and this decree to create, in foresight
of all that will follow, is a decree of what follows. For the Arminian view, see Watson,
Institutes, 2:375-398, 422-448. <hi rend='italic'>Per contra</hi>, see Hill, Divinity, 512-582; Fiske, in Bib. Sac.,
April, 1862; Bennett Tyler, Memoir and Lectures, 214-254; Edwards the younger, 1:398-420;
A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion, 98-101.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. From the Divine Wisdom.</head>

<p>
It is the part of wisdom to proceed in every undertaking according to a
plan. The greater the undertaking, the more needful a plan. Wisdom,
moreover, shows itself in a careful provision for all possible circumstances
and emergencies that can arise in the execution of its plan. That many
such circumstances and emergencies are uncontemplated and unprovided
for in the plans of men, is due only to the limitations of human wisdom.
It belongs to infinite wisdom, therefore, not only to have a plan, but to
embrace all, even the minutest details, in the plan of the universe.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
No architect would attempt to build a Cologne cathedral without a plan; he would
rather, if possible, have a design for every stone. The great painter does not study
out his picture as he goes along; the plan is in his mind from the start; preparations
for the last effects have to be made from the beginning. So in God's work every detail
is foreseen and provided for; sin and Christ entered into the original plan of the universe.
Raymond, Syst. Theol., 2:156, says this implies that God cannot govern the
world unless all things be reduced to the condition of machinery; and that it cannot
be true, for the reason that God's government is a government of persons and not of
things. But we reply that the wise statesman governs persons and not things, yet just
in proportion to his wisdom he conducts his administration according to a preconceived
plan. God's power might, but God's wisdom would not, govern the universe
without embracing all things, even the least human action, in his plan.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>C. From the Divine Immutability.</head>

<p>
What God does, he always purposed to do. Since with him there is no
increase of knowledge or power, such as characterizes finite beings, it follows
that what under any given circumstances he permits or does, he must
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
have eternally decreed to permit or do. To suppose that God has a multitude
of plans, and that he changes his plan with the exigencies of the situation,
is to make him infinitely dependent upon the varying wills of his
creatures, and to deny to him one necessary element of perfection, namely,
immutability.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
God has been very unworthily compared to a chess-player, who will checkmate his
opponent whatever moves he may make (George Harris). So Napoleon is said to have
had a number of plans before each battle, and to have betaken himself from one to
another as fortune demanded. Not so with God. <emph>Job 23:13&mdash;<q>he is in one mind, and who can turn
him?</q></emph> <emph>James 1:17-<q>the Father of lights, with whom can be no variation, neither shadow that is cast by turning.</q></emph>
Contrast with this Scripture McCabe's statement in his Foreknowledge of God, 62&mdash;<q>This
new factor, the godlike liberty of the human will, is capable of thwarting, and
in uncounted instances does thwart, the divine will, and compel the great <hi rend='smallcaps'>I Am</hi> to
modify his actions, his purposes, and his plans, in the treatment of individuals and of
communities.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>D. From the Divine Benevolence.</head>

<p>
The events of the universe, if not determined by the divine decrees, must
be determined either by chance or by the wills of creatures. It is contrary
to any proper conception of the divine benevolence to suppose that God
permits the course of nature and of history, and the ends to which both
these are moving, to be determined for myriads of sentient beings by any
other force or will than his own. Both reason and revelation, therefore,
compel us to accept the doctrine of the Westminster Confession, that <q>God
did from all eternity, by the most just and holy counsel of his own will,
freely and unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It would not be benevolent for God to put out of his own power that which was so
essential to the happiness of the universe. Tyler, Memoir and Lectures, 231-243&mdash;<q>The
denial of decrees involves denial of the essential attributes of God, such as omnipotence,
omniscience, benevolence; exhibits him as a disappointed and unhappy being;
implies denial of his universal providence; leads to a denial of the greater part of our
own duty of submission; weakens the obligations of gratitude.</q> We give thanks to
God for blessings which come to us through the free acts of others; but unless God
has purposed these blessings, we owe our thanks to these others and not to God. Dr.
A. J. Gordon said well that a universe without decrees would be as irrational and
appalling as would be an express-train driving on in the darkness without headlight or
engineer, and with no certainty that the next moment it might not plunge into the
abyss. And even Martineau, Study, 2:108, in spite of his denial of God's foreknowledge
of man's free acts, is compelled to say: <q>It cannot be left to mere created
natures to play unconditionally with the helm of even a single world and steer it
uncontrolled into the haven or on to the reefs; and some security must be taken for
keeping the deflections within tolerable bounds.</q> See also Emmons, Works, 4:273-401:
and Princeton Essays, 1:57-73.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Objections to the Doctrine of Decrees.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. That they are inconsistent with the free agency of man.</head>

<p>
To this we reply that:
</p>

<p>
A. The objection confounds the decrees with the execution of the
decrees. The decrees are, like foreknowledge, an act eternal to the divine
nature, and are no more inconsistent with free agency than foreknowledge
is. Even foreknowledge of events implies that those events are fixed. If
this absolute fixity and foreknowledge is not inconsistent with free agency,
much less can that which is more remote from man's action, namely, the
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
hidden cause of this fixity and foreknowledge&mdash;God's decrees&mdash;be inconsistent
with free agency. If anything be inconsistent with man's free
agency, it must be, not the decrees themselves, but the execution of the
decrees in creation and providence.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
On this objection, see Tyler, Memoir and Lectures, 244-249; Forbes, Predestination and
Free Will, 3&mdash;<q>All things are <emph>predestinated</emph> by God, both good and evil, but not <emph>prenecessitated</emph>,
that is, causally preördained by him&mdash;unless we would make God the author
of sin. Predestination is thus an indifferent word, in so far as the originating author of
anything is concerned; God being the originator of good, but the creature, of evil.
Predestination therefore means that God included in his plan of the world every act of
every creature, good or bad. Some acts he predestined causally, others permissively.
The certainty of the fulfilment of all God's purposes ought to be distinguished from
their necessity.</q> This means simply that God's decree is not the <emph>cause</emph> of any act or
event. God's decrees may be executed by the causal efficiency of his creatures, or
they may be executed by his own efficiency. In either case it is, if anything, the execution,
and not the decree, that is inconsistent with human freedom.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
B. The objection rests upon a false theory of free agency&mdash;namely, that
free agency implies indeterminateness or uncertainty; in other words, that
free agency cannot coëxist with certainty as to the results of its exercise.
But it is necessity, not certainty, with which free agency is inconsistent.
Free agency is the power of self-determination in view of motives, or man's
power (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) to chose between motives, and (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) to direct his subsequent
activity according to the motive thus chosen. Motives are never a cause,
but only an occasion; they influence, but never compel; the man is the
cause, and herein is his freedom. But it is also true that man is never in a
state of indeterminateness; never acts without motive, or contrary to all
motives; there is always a reason why he acts, and herein is his rationality.
Now, so far as man acts according to previously dominant motive&mdash;see (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>)
above&mdash;we may by knowing his motive predict his action, and our certainty
what that action will be in no way affects his freedom. We may even bring
motives to bear upon others, the influence of which we foresee, yet those
who act upon them may act in perfect freedom. But if man, influenced by
man, may still be free, then man, influenced by divinely foreseen motives,
may still be free, and the divine decrees, which simply render certain
man's actions, may also be perfectly consistent with man's freedom.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We must not assume that decreed ends can be secured only by compulsion. Eternal
purposes do not necessitate efficient causation on the part of the purposer. Freedom
may be the very means of fulfilling the purpose. E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology,
74&mdash;<q>Absolute certainty of events, which is all that omniscience determines respecting
them, is not identical with their necessitation.</q> John Milton, Christian Doctrine:
<q>Future events which God has foreseen will happen certainly, but not of necessity.
They will happen certainly, because the divine prescience will not be deceived; but
they will not happen necessarily, because prescience can have no influence on the
object foreknown, inasmuch as it is only an intransitive action.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
There is, however, a smaller class of human actions by which character
is changed, rather than expressed, and in which the man acts according to
a motive different from that which has previously been dominant&mdash;see (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>)
above. These actions also are foreknown by God, although they cannot
be predicted by man. Man's freedom in them would be inconsistent with
God's decrees, if the previous certainty of their occurrence were, not certainty,
but necessity; or, in other words, if God's decrees were in all cases
decrees efficiently to produce the acts of his creatures. But this is not the
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
case. God's decrees may be executed by man's free causation, as easily as
by God's; and God's decreeing this free causation, in decreeing to create a
universe of which he foresees that this causation will be a part, in no way
interferes with the freedom of such causation, but rather secures and establishes
it. Both consciousness and conscience witness that God's decrees
are not executed by laying compulsion upon the free wills of men.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The farmer who, after hearing a sermon on God's decrees, took the break-neck road
instead of the safe one to his home and broke his wagon in consequence, concluded
before the end of his journey that he at any rate had been predestinated to be a fool, and
that he had made his calling and election sure. Ladd, Philosophy of Conduct, 146, 187,
shows that the will is free, first, by man's consciousness of ability, and, secondly, by
man's consciousness of imputability. By nature, he is <emph>potentially</emph> self-determining; as
matter of fact, he often <emph>becomes</emph> self-determining.
</p>

<p>
Allen, Religious Progress, 110&mdash;<q>The coming church must embrace the sovereignty
of God and the freedom of the will; total depravity and the divinity of human nature;
the unity of God and the triune distinctions in the Godhead; gnosticism and agnosticism;
the humanity of Christ and his incarnate deity; the freedom of the Christian
man and the authority of the church; individualism and solidarity; reason and faith;
science and theology; miracle and uniformity of law; culture and piety; the authority
of the Bible as the word of God with absolute freedom of Biblical criticism; the
gift of administration as in the historic episcopate and the gift of prophecy as the
highest sanction of the ministerial commission; the apostolic succession but also the
direct and immediate call which knows only the succession of the Holy Ghost.</q> Without
assenting to these latter clauses we may commend the comprehensive spirit of this
utterance, especially with reference to the vexed question of the relation of divine
sovereignty to human freedom.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It may aid us, in estimating the force of this objection, to note the four
senses in which the term <q>freedom</q> may be used. It may be used as
equivalent to (1) <emph>physical</emph> freedom, or absence of outward constraint; (2)
<emph>formal</emph> freedom, or a state of moral indeterminateness; (3) <emph>moral</emph> freedom,
or self-determinateness in view of motives; (4) <emph>real</emph> freedom, or ability
to conform to the divine standard. With the first of these we are not now
concerned, since all agree that the decrees lay no outward constraint upon
men. Freedom in the second sense has no existence, since all men have
character. Free agency, or freedom in the third sense, has just been shown
to be consistent with the decrees. Freedom in the fourth sense, or real
freedom, is the special gift of God, and is not to be confounded with free
agency. The objection mentioned above rests wholly upon the second of
these definitions of free agency. This we have shown to be false, and with
this the objection itself falls to the ground.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Ritschl, Justification and Reconciliation, 133-188, gives a good definition of this
fourth kind of freedom: <q>Freedom is self-determination by universal ideals. Limiting
our ends to those of family or country is a refined or idealized selfishness. Freedom
is self-determination by universal love for man or by the kingdom of God. But
the free man must then be dependent on God in everything, because the kingdom of
God is a revelation of God.</q> John Caird, Fundamental Ideas of Christianity, 1:133&mdash;<q>In
being determined by God we are self-determined; <hi rend='italic'>i. e.</hi>, determined by nothing
alien to us, but by our noblest, truest self. The universal life lives in us. The eternal
consciousness becomes our own; for <emph><q>he that abideth in love abideth in God and God abideth in him</q>
(1 John 4:16)</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Moberly, Atonement and Personality, 226&mdash;<q>Free will is not the independence of the
creature, but is rather his self-realization in perfect dependence. Freedom is self-identity
with goodness. Both goodness and freedom are, in their perfectness, in God.
Goodness in a creature is not distinction from, but correspondence with, the goodness
of God. Freedom in a creature is correspondence with God's own self-identity
with goodness. It is to realize and to find <emph>himself</emph>, his <emph>true</emph> self, in Christ, so that God's
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
love in us has become a divine response, adequate to, because truly mirroring, God.</q>
G. S. Lee, The Shadow Christ, 32&mdash;.<q>The ten commandments could not be chanted.
The Israelites sang about Jehovah and what he had done, but they did not sing about
what he told them to do, and that is why they never did it. The conception of duty
that cannot sing must weep until it learns to sing. This is Hebrew history.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There is a liberty, unsung By poets and by senators unpraised, Which monarchs
cannot grant nor all the powers Of earth and hell confederate take away; A liberty
which persecution, fraud, Oppressions, prisons, have no power to bind; Which whoso
tastes can be enslaved no more. 'T is liberty of heart, derived from heaven, Bought
with his blood who gave it to mankind, And sealed with the same token.</q> Robert
Herrick: <q>Stone walls do not a prison make, Nor iron bars a cage; Minds innocent
and quiet take That for a hermitage. If I have freedom in my love, And in my soul
am free, Angels alone that soar above Enjoy such liberty.</q>
</p>

<p>
A more full discussion of the doctrine of the Will is given under Anthropology, Vol.
II. It is sufficient here to say that the Arminian objections to the decrees arise almost
wholly from erroneously conceiving of freedom as the will's power to decide, in any
given case, against its own character and all the motives brought to bear upon it. As
we shall hereafter see, this is practically to deny that man has character, or that the
will by its right or wrong moral action gives to itself, as well as to the intellect and
affections, a permanent bent or predisposition to good or evil. It is to extend the
power of contrary choice, a power which belongs to the sphere of transient volition,
over all those permanent states of intellect, affection, and will which we call the moral
character, and to say that we can change directly by a single volition that which, as a
matter of fact, we can change only indirectly through process and means. Yet even
this exaggerated view of freedom would seem not to exclude God's decrees, or prevent
a practical reconciliation of the Arminian and Calvinistic views, so long as the
Arminian grants God's foreknowledge of free human acts, and the Calvinist grants
that God's decree of these acts is not necessarily a decree that God will efficiently
produce them. For a close approximation of the two views, see articles by Raymond
and by A. A. Hodge, respectively, on the Arminian and the Calvinistic Doctrines of
the Will, in McClintock and Strong's Cyclopædia, 10:989, 992.
</p>

<p>
We therefore hold to the certainty of human action, and so part company with the
Arminian. We cannot with Whedon (On the Will), and Hazard (Man a Creative First
Cause), attribute to the will the freedom of indifference, or the power to act without
motive. We hold with Calderwood, Moral Philosophy, 188, that action without motive,
or an act of pure will, is unknown in consciousness (see, however, an inconsistent
statement of Calderwood on page 188 of the same work). Every future human act
will not only be performed with a motive, but will certainly be one thing rather than
another; and God knows what it will be. Whatever may be the method of God's foreknowledge,
and whether it be derived from motives or be intuitive, that foreknowledge
presupposes God's decree to create, and so presupposes the making certain of the free
acts that follow creation.
</p>

<p>
But this certainty is not necessity. In reconciling God's decrees with human freedom,
we must not go to the other extreme, and reduce human freedom to mere determinism,
or the power of the agent to act out his character in the circumstances which
environ him. Human action is not simply the expression of previously dominant
affections; else Neither Satan nor Adam could have fallen, nor could the Christian ever
sin. We therefore part company with Jonathan Edwards and his Treatise on the
Freedom of the Will, as well as with the younger Edwards (Works, 1:420), Alexander
(Moral Science, 107), and Charles Hodge (Syst. Theology, 2:278), all of whom follow
Jonathan Edwards in identifying sensibility with the will, in regarding affections as
the causes of volitions, and in speaking of the connection between motive and action
as a necessary one. We hold, on the contrary, that sensibility and will are two distinct
powers, that affections are occasions but never causes of volitions, and that, while
motives may infallibly persuade, they never compel the will. The power to make the
decision other than it is resides in the will, though it may never be exercised. With
Charnock, the Puritan (Attributes, 1:448-450), we say that <q>man hath a power to do
otherwise than that which God foreknows he will do.</q> Since, then, God's decrees are
not executed by laying compulsion upon human wills, they are not inconsistent with
man's freedom. See Martineau, Study, 2:237, 249, 258, 261; also article by A. H. Strong,
on Modified Calvinism, or Remainders of Freedom in Man, in Baptist Review, 1883:219-243;
reprinted in the author's Philosophy and Religion, 114-128.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. That they take away all motive for human exertion.</head>

<p>
To this we reply that:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) They cannot thus influence men, since they are not addressed to
men, are not the rule of human action, and become known only after the
event. This objection is therefore the mere excuse of indolence and
disobedience.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Men rarely make this excuse in any enterprise in which their hopes and their interests
are enlisted. It is mainly in matters of religion that men use the divine decrees as
an apology for their sloth and inaction. The passengers on an ocean steamer do not
deny their ability to walk to starboard or to larboard, upon the plea that they are being
carried to their destination by forces beyond their control. Such a plea would be still
more irrational in a case where the passengers' inaction, as in case of fire, might
result in destruction to the ship.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The objection confounds the decrees of God with fate. But it is to
be observed that fate is unintelligent, while the decrees are framed by a
personal God in infinite wisdom; fate is indistinguishable from material
causation and leaves no room for human freedom, while the decrees exclude
all notion of physical necessity; fate embraces no moral ideas or ends,
while the decrees make these controlling in the universe.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
North British Rev., April, 1870&mdash;<q>Determinism and predestination spring from premises
which lie in quite separate regions of thought. The predestinarian is obliged by
his theology to admit the existence of a free will in God, and, as a matter of fact, he
does admit it in the devil. But the final consideration which puts a great gulf between
the determinist and the predestinarian is this, that the latter asserts the reality of the
vulgar notion of moral desert. Even if he were not obliged by his interpretation of
Scripture to assert this, he would be obliged to assert it in order to help out his doctrine
of eternal reprobation.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hawthorne expressed his belief in human freedom when be said that destiny itself
had often been worsted in the attempt to get him out to dinner. Benjamin Franklin,
in his Autobiography, quotes the Indian's excuse for getting drunk: <q>The Great
Spirit made all things for some use, and whatsoever use they were made for, to that
use they must be put. The Great Spirit made rum for Indians to get drunk with, and
so it must be.</q> Martha, in Isabel Carnaby, excuses her breaking of dishes by saying:
<q>It seems as if it was to be. It is the thin edge of the wedge that in time will turn
again and rend you.</q> Seminary professor: <q>Did a man ever die before his time?</q>
Seminary student: <q>I never knew of such a case.</q> The decrees of God, considered
as God's all-embracing plan, leave room for human freedom.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The objection ignores the logical relation between the decree of
the end and the decree of the means to secure it. The decrees of God not
only ensure the end to be obtained, but they ensure free human action
as logically prior thereto. All conflict between the decrees and human
exertion must therefore be apparent and not real. Since consciousness
and Scripture assure us that free agency exists, it must exist by divine
decree; and though we may be ignorant of the method in which the
decrees are executed, we have no right to doubt either the decrees or the
freedom. They must be held to be consistent, until one of them is proved
to be a delusion.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The man who carries a vase of gold-fish does not prevent the fish from moving
unrestrainedly within the vase. The double track of a railway enables a formidable
approaching train to slip by without colliding with our own. Our globe takes us with
it, as it rushes around the sun, yet we do our ordinary work without interruption.
The two movements which at first sight seem inconsistent with each other are really
parts of one whole. God's plan and man's effort are equally in harmony. Myers,
Human Personality, 2:272, speaks of <q>molecular motion amid molar calm.</q>
</p>

<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>

<p>
Dr. Duryea: <q>The way of life has two fences. There is an Arminian fence to keep
us out of Fatalism; and there is a Calvinistic fence to keep us out of Pelagianism.
Some good brethren like to walk on the fences. But it is hard in that way to keep
one's balance. And it is needless, for there is plenty of room between the fences. For
my part I prefer to walk in the road.</q> Archibald Alexander's statement is yet better:
<q>Calvinism is the broadest of systems. It regards the divine sovereignty and the
freedom of the human will as the two sides of a roof which come together at a ridgepole
above the clouds. Calvinism accepts both truths. A system which denies either
one of the two has only half a roof over its head.</q>
</p>

<p>
Spurgeon, Autobiography, 1:176, and The Best Bread, 109&mdash;<q>The system of truth
revealed in the Scriptures is not simply one straight line but two, and no man will
ever get a right view of the gospel until he knows how to look at the two lines at once....
These two facts [of divine sovereignty and of human freedom] are parallel lines;
I cannot make them unite, but you cannot make them cross each other.</q> John A.
Broadus: <q>You can see only two sides of a building at once; if you go around it, you
see two different sides, but the first two are hidden. This is true if you are on the
ground. But if you get up upon the roof or in a balloon, you can see that there are
four sides, and you can see them all together. So our finite minds can take in sovereignty
and freedom alternately, but not simultaneously. God from above can see
them both, and from heaven we too may be able to look down and see.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) Since the decrees connect means and ends together, and ends are
decreed only as the result of means, they encourage effort instead of discouraging
it. Belief in God's plan that success shall reward toil, incites
to courageous and persevering effort. Upon the very ground of God's
decree, the Scripture urges us to the diligent use of means.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
God has decreed the harvest only as the result of man's labor in sowing and reaping;
God decrees wealth to the man who works and saves; so answers are decreed to prayer,
and salvation to faith. Compare Paul's declaration of God's purpose (<emph>Acts 27:22, 24&mdash;<q>there
shall be no loss of life among you.... God hath granted thee all them that sail with thee</q></emph>) with his warning to
the centurion and sailors to use the means of safety (<emph>verse 31&mdash;<q>Except these abide in the ship, ye
cannot be saved</q></emph>). See also <emph>Phil. 2:12, 13&mdash;<q>work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God who
worketh in you both to will and to work, for his good pleasure</q></emph>; <emph>Eph. 2:10&mdash;<q>we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus for good works, which God afore prepared that we should walk in them</q></emph>; <emph>Deut. 29:29&mdash;<q>the secret things
belong unto Jehovah our God: but the things that are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that we may
do all the words of this law.</q></emph> See Bennet Tyler, Memoir and Lectures, 252-354.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Ps. 59:10 (A. V.)&mdash;<q>The God of my mercy shall prevent me</q></emph>&mdash;shall anticipate, or go before, me; <emph>Is. 65:24&mdash;<q>before
they call, I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear</q></emph>; <emph>Ps. 23:2&mdash;<q>He leadeth me</q></emph>; <emph>John
10:3&mdash;<q>calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out.</q></emph> These texts describe prevenient grace
in prayer, in conversion, and in Christian work. Plato called reason and sensibility
a mismatched pair, one of which was always getting ahead of the other. Decrees and
freedom <emph>seem</emph> to be mismatched, but they are not so. Even Jonathan Edwards, with
his deterministic theory of the will, could, in his sermon on Pressing into the Kingdom,
insist on the use of means, and could appeal to men as if they had the power
to choose between the motives of self and of God. God's sovereignty and human
freedom are like the positive and the negative poles of the magnet,&mdash;they are inseparable
from one another, and are both indispensable elements in the attraction of the
gospel.
</p>

<p>
Peter Damiani, the great monk-cardinal, said that the sin he found it hardest to
uproot was his disposition to laughter. The homage paid to asceticism is the homage
paid to the conqueror. But not all conquests are worthy of homage. Better the words
of Luther: <q>If our God may make excellent large pike and good Rhenish wine, I may
very well venture to eat and drink. Thou mayest enjoy every pleasure in the world
that is not sinful; thy God forbids thee not, but rather wills it. And it is pleasing to
the dear God whenever thou rejoicest or laughest from the bottom of thy heart.</q>
But our freedom has its limits. Martha Baker Dunn: <q>A man fishing for pickerel
baits his hook with a live minnow and throws him into the water. The little minnow
seems to be swimming gaily at his own free will, but just the moment he attempts
to move out of his appointed course he begins to realize that there is a hook in his back.
That is what we find out when we try to swim against the stream of God's decrees.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>3. That they make God the author of sin.</head>

<p>
To this we reply:
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) They make God, not the author of sin, but the author of free beings
who are themselves the authors of sin. God does not decree efficiently to
work evil desires or choices in men. He decrees sin only in the sense of
decreeing to create and preserve those who will sin; in other words, he
decrees to create and preserve human wills which, in their own self-chosen
courses, will be and do evil. In all this, man attributes sin to himself and
not to God, and God hates, denounces, and punishes sin.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Joseph's brethren were none the less wicked for the fact that God meant their conduct
to result in good (<emph>Gen. 50:20</emph>). Pope Leo X and his indulgences brought on the
Reformation, but he was none the less guilty. Slaveholders would have been no more
excusable, even if they had been able to prove that the negro race was cursed in the
curse of Canaan (<emph>Gen. 9:25&mdash;<q>Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren</q></emph>). Fitch,
in Christian Spectator, 3:601&mdash;<q>There can be and is a purpose of God which is not
an <emph>efficient</emph> purpose. It embraces the voluntary acts of moral beings, without creating
those acts by divine efficiency.</q> See Martineau, Study, 2:107, 136.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Mat. 26:24&mdash;<q>The Son of man goeth even as it is written of him: but woe unto that man through whom the Son of
man is betrayed! good were it for that man if he had not been born.</q></emph> It was appointed that Christ should
suffer, but that did not make men less free agents, nor diminish the guilt of their
treachery and injustice. Robert G. Ingersoll asked: <q>Why did God create the devil?</q>
We reply that God did not create the devil,&mdash;it was the devil who made the devil. God
made a holy and free spirit who abused his liberty, himself created sin, and so made
himself a devil.
</p>

<p>
Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 1:299&mdash;<q>Evil has been referred to 1. an extra-divine
principle&mdash;to one or many evil spirits, or to fate, or to matter&mdash;at all events to a
principle limiting the divine power; 2. a want or defect in the Deity himself, either his
imperfect wisdom or his imperfect goodness; 3. human culpability, either a universal
imperfection of human nature, or particular transgressions of the first men.</q> The
third of these explanations is the true one: the first is irrational; the second is blasphemous.
Yet this second is the explanation of Omar Khayyám, Rubáiyat, stanzas 80,
81&mdash;<q>Oh Thou, who didst with pitfall and with gin Beset the road I was to wander in,
Thou wilt not with predestined evil round Enmesh, and then impute my fall to sin.
Oh Thou, who man of baser earth didst make, And ev'n with Paradise devise the snake:
For all the sin wherewith the face of man Is blackened&mdash;man's forgiveness give&mdash;and
take!</q> And David Harum similarly says: <q>If I've done anything to be sorry for,
I'm willing to be forgiven.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) The decree to permit sin is therefore not an efficient but a permissive
decree, or a decree to permit, in distinction from a decree to produce
by his own efficiency. No difficulty attaches to such a decree to permit sin,
which does not attach to the actual permission of it. But God does actually
permit sin, and it must be right for him to permit it. It must therefore
be right for him to decree to permit it. If God's holiness and wisdom and
power are not impugned by the actual existence of moral evil, they are not
impugned by the original decree that it should exist.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Jonathan Edwards, Works, 2:100&mdash;<q>The sun is not the <emph>cause</emph> of the darkness that
follows its setting, but only the <emph>occasion</emph></q>; 254&mdash;<q>If by the author of sin be meant the
sinner, the agent, or the actor of sin, or the doer of a wicked thing&mdash;so it would be a
reproach and blasphemy to suppose God to be the author of sin.... But if by author
of sin is meant the permitter or non-hinderer of sin, and at the same time a disposer of
the state of events in such a manner, for wise, holy, and most excellent ends and purposes,
<emph>that sin</emph>, if it be permitted and not hindered, <emph>will most certainly follow</emph>, I do not
deny that God is the author of sin: it is no reproach to the Most High to be <emph>thus</emph> the
author of sin.</q> On the objection that the doctrine of decrees imputes to God two wills,
and that he has foreordained what he has forbidden, see Bennet Tyler, Memoir and Lectures,
250-252&mdash;<q>A ruler may forbid treason; but his command does not oblige him to
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
do all in his power to prevent disobedience to it. It may promote the good of his kingdom
to suffer the treason to be committed, and the traitor to be punished according to
law. That in view of this resulting good he chooses not to prevent the treason, does
not imply any contradiction or opposition of will in the monarch.</q>
</p>

<p>
An ungodly editor excused his vicious journalism by saying that he was not ashamed
to describe anything which Providence had permitted to happen. But <q>permitted</q>
here had an implication of causation. He laid the blame of the evil upon Providence.
He was ashamed to describe many things that were good and which God actually
caused, while he was not ashamed to describe the immoral things which God did not
cause, but only permitted men to cause. In this sense we may assent to Jonathan
Edwards's words: <q>The divine Being is not the author of sin, but only disposes things
in such a manner that sin will certainly ensue.</q> These words are found in his treatise
on Original Sin. In his Essay on Freedom of the Will, he adds a doctrine of causation
which we must repudiate: <q>The essence of virtue and vice, as they exist in the disposition
of the heart, and are manifested in the acts of the will, lies not in their <emph>Cause</emph>
but in their <emph>Nature</emph>.</q> We reply that sin could not be condemnable in its nature, if God
and not man were its cause.
</p>

<p>
Robert Browning, Mihrab Shah: <q>Wherefore should any evil hap to man&mdash;From
ache of flesh to agony of soul&mdash;Since God's All-mercy mates All-potency? Nay, why
permits he evil to himself&mdash;man's sin, accounted such? Suppose a world purged of all
pain, with fit inhabitant&mdash;Man pure of evil in thought, word and deed&mdash;were it not well?
Then, wherefore otherwise?</q> Fairbairn answers the question, as follows, in his Christ
in Modern Theology, 456&mdash;<q>Evil once intended may be vanquished by being allowed;
but were it hindered by an act of annihilation, then the victory would rest with the evil
which had compelled the Creator to retrace his steps. And, to carry the prevention
backward another stage, if the possibility of evil had hindered the creative action of
God, then he would have been, as it were, overcome by its very shadow. But why did
he create a being capable of sinning? Only so could he create a being capable of obeying.
The ability to do good implies the capability of doing evil. The engine can neither
obey nor disobey, and the creature who was without this double ability might be a
machine, but could be no child. Moral perfection can be attained, but cannot be created;
God can make a being capable of moral action, but not a being with all the fruits
of moral action garnered within him.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The difficulty is therefore one which in substance clings to all theistic
systems alike&mdash;the question why moral evil is permitted under the
government of a God infinitely holy, wise, powerful, and good. This
problem is, to our finite powers, incapable of full solution, and must remain
to a great degree shrouded in mystery. With regard to it we can only say:
</p>

<p>
Negatively,&mdash;that God does not permit moral evil because he is not unalterably
opposed to sin; nor because moral evil was unforeseen and independent
of his will; nor because he could not have prevented it in a moral
system. Both observation and experience, which testify to multiplied
instances of deliverance from sin without violation of the laws of man's
being, forbid as to limit the power of God.
</p>

<p>
Positively,&mdash;we seem constrained to say that God permits moral evil
because moral evil, though in itself abhorrent to his nature, is yet the incident
of a system adapted to his purpose of self-revelation; and further,
because it is his wise and sovereign will to institute and maintain this system
of which moral evil is an incident, rather than to withhold his self-revelation
or to reveal himself through another system in which moral evil
should be continually prevented by the exercise of divine power.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
There are four questions which neither Scripture nor reason enables us completely
to solve and to which we may safely say that only the higher knowledge of the future
state will furnish the answers. These questions are, first, how can a holy God permit
moral evil? secondly, how could a being created pure ever fall? thirdly, how can we
be responsible for inborn depravity? fourthly, how could Christ justly suffer? The
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
first of these questions now confronts us. A complete theodicy (Θεός, God, and δική,
justice) would be a vindication of the justice of God in permitting the natural and
moral evil that exists under his government. While a complete theodicy is beyond
our powers, we throw some light upon God's permission of moral evil by considering
(1) that freedom of will is necessary to virtue; (2) that God suffers from sin more than
does the sinner; (3) that, with the permission of sin, God provided a redemption; and,
(4) that God will eventually overrule all evil for good.
</p>

<p>
It is possible that the elect angels belong to a moral system in which sin is prevented
by constraining motives. We cannot deny that God could prevent sin in a moral system.
But it is very doubtful whether God could prevent sin in the <emph>best</emph> moral system.
The most perfect freedom is indispensable to the attainment of the highest virtue.
Spurgeon: <q>There could have been no moral government without permission to sin.
God could have created blameless puppets, but they could have had no virtue.</q>
Behrends: <q>If moral beings were incapable of perversion, man would have had all the
virtue of a planet,&mdash;that is, no virtue at all.</q> Sin was permitted, then, only because
it could be overruled for the greatest good. This greatest good, we may add, is not
simply the highest nobility and virtue of the creature, but also the revelation of the
Creator. But for sin, God's justice and God's mercy alike would have been unintelligible
to the universe. E. G. Robinson: <q>God could not have revealed his character so
well without moral evil as with moral evil.</q>
</p>

<p>
Robert Browning, Christmas Eve, tells us that it was God's plan to make man in his
own image: <q>To create man, and then leave him Able, his own word saith, to grieve
him; But able to glorify him too, As a mere machine could never do, That prayed or
praised, all unaware Of its fitness for aught but praise or prayer, Made perfect as a
thing of course.</q> Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 268-270, 324, holds that sin and wickedness
is an absolute evil, but an evil permitted to exist because the effacement of it would
mean the effacement at the same time both for God and man, of the possibility of reaching
the highest spiritual good. See also Martineau, Study of Religion, 2:108; Momerie,
Origin of Evil; St. Clair, Evil Physical and Moral; Voysey, Mystery of Pain, Death
and Sin.
</p>

<p>
C. G. Finney, Skeletons of a Course of Theological Studies, 26, 27&mdash;<q>Infinite goodness,
knowledge and power imply only that, if a universe were made, it would be
the best that was naturally possible.</q> To say that God could not be the author of a
universe in which there is so much of evil, he says, <q>assumes that a better universe,
upon the whole, was a natural possibility. It assumes that a universe of moral beings
could, under a moral government administered in the wisest and best manner, be
wholly restrained from sin; but this needs proof, and never can be proved.... The
best possible universe may not be the best conceivable universe. Apply the legal
maxim, <q>The defendant is to have the benefit of the doubt, and that in proportion to
the established character of his reputation.</q> There is so much clearly indicating the
benevolence of God, that we may <emph>believe</emph> in his benevolence, where we cannot <emph>see</emph> it.</q>
</p>

<p>
For advocacy of the view that God cannot prevent evil in a moral system, see Birks,
Difficulties of Belief, 17; Young, The Mystery, or Evil not from God; Bledsoe, Theodicy;
N. W. Taylor, Moral Government, 1:288-349; 2:327-356. According to Dr. Taylor's view,
God has not a complete control over the moral universe; moral agents can do wrong
under every possible influence to prevent it; God prefers, all things considered, that all
his creatures should be holy and happy, and does all in his power to make them so; the
existence of sin is not on the whole for the best; sin exists because God cannot prevent
it in a moral system; the blessedness of God is actually impaired by the disobedience
of his creatures. For criticism of these views, see Tyler, Letters on the New Haven
Theology, 129, 219. Tyler argues that election and non-election imply power in God to
prevent sin; that <emph>permitting</emph> is not mere <emph>submitting</emph> to something which he could not
possibly prevent. We would add that as a matter of fact God has preserved holy
angels, and that there are <emph><q>just men</q></emph> who have been <emph><q>made perfect</q></emph> (<emph>Heb. 12:23</emph>) without
violating the laws of moral agency. We infer that God could have so preserved Adam.
The history of the church leads us to believe that there is no sinner so stubborn that
God cannot renew his heart,&mdash;even a Saul can be turned into a Paul. We hesitate
therefore to ascribe limits to God's power. While Dr. Taylor held that God could not
prevent sin in <emph>a</emph> moral system, that is, in <emph>any</emph> moral system, Dr. Park is understood to
hold the greatly preferable view that God cannot prevent sin in the <emph>best</emph> moral system.
Flint, Christ's Kingdom upon Earth, 59&mdash;<q>The alternative is, not evil or no evil, but
evil or the miraculous prevention of evil.</q> See Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:406-422.
</p>

<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>

<p>
But even granting that the present is the best moral system, and that in such a system
evil cannot be prevented consistently with God's wisdom and goodness, the question
still remains how the decree to initiate such a system can consist with God's fundamental
attribute of holiness. Of this insoluble mystery we must say as Dr. John
Brown, in Spare Hours, 273, says of Arthur H. Hallam's Theodicæa Novissima: <q>As
was to be expected, the tremendous subject remains where he found it. His glowing
love and genius cast a gleam here and there across its gloom, but it is as brief as the
lightning in the collied night&mdash;the jaws of darkness do devour it up&mdash;this secret
belongs to God. Across its deep and dazzling darkness, and from out its abyss of thick
cloud, <q>all dark, dark, irrecoverably dark,</q> no steady ray has ever or will ever come;
over its face its own darkness must brood, till he to whom alone the darkness and
the light are both alike, to whom the night shineth as the day, says <q>Let there be light!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
We must remember, however, that the decree of redemption is as old as the decree of
the apostasy. The provision of salvation in Christ shows at how great a cost to God was
permitted the fall of the race in Adam. He who ordained sin ordained also an atonement
for sin and a way of escape from it. Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:388&mdash;<q>The permission
of sin has cost God more than it has man. No sacrifice and suffering on account of
sin has been undergone by any man, equal to that which has been endured by an incarnate
God. This shows that God is not acting selfishly in permitting it.</q> On the permission
of moral evil, see Butler, Analogy, Bohn's ed., 177, 232&mdash;<q>The Government of
God, and Christianity, as Schemes imperfectly Comprehended</q>; Hill, System of Divinity,
528-559; Ulrici, art.: Theodicée, in Herzog's Encyclopädie; Cunningham, Historical
Theology, 2:416-489; Patton, on Retribution and the Divine Purpose, in Princeton Rev.,
1878:16-23; Bib. Sac, 20:471-488; Wood, The Witness of Sin.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Concluding Remarks.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>1. Practical uses of the doctrine of decrees.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) It inspires humility by its representation of God's unsearchable
counsels and absolute sovereignty. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) It teaches confidence in him who
has wisely ordered our birth, our death, and our surroundings, even to the
minutest particulars, and has made all things work together for the triumph
of his kingdom and the good of those who love him; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) It shows the
enemies of God that, as their sins have been foreseen and provided for in
God's plan, so they can never, while remaining in their sins, hope to escape
their decreed and threatened penalty. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) It urges the sinner to avail
himself of the appointed means of grace, if he would be counted among the
number of those for whom God has decreed salvation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This doctrine is one of those advanced teachings of Scripture which requires for its
understanding a matured mind and a deep experience. The beginner in the Christian
life may not see its value or even its truth, but with increasing years it will become a
staff to lean upon. In times of affliction, obloquy, and persecution, the church has
found in the decrees of God, and in the prophecies in which these decrees are published,
her strong consolation. It is only upon the basis of the decrees that we can believe
that <emph><q>all things work together for good</q> (Rom. 8:28)</emph> or pray <emph><q>Thy will be done</q> (Mat. 6:10)</emph>.
</p>

<p>
It is a striking evidence of the truth of the doctrine that even Arminians pray and
sing like Calvinists. Charles Wesley, the Arminian, can write: <q>He wills that I should
holy be&mdash;What can withstand his will? The counsel of his grace in me He surely will
fulfill.</q> On the Arminian theory, prayer that God will soften hard hearts is out of
place,&mdash;the prayer should be offered to the sinner; for it is his will, not God's, that is
in the way of his salvation. And yet this doctrine of Decrees, which at first sight might
seem to discourage effort, is the greatest, in fact is the only effectual, incentive to effort.
For this reason Calvinists have been the most strenuous advocates of civil liberty.
Those who submit themselves most unreservedly to the sovereignty of God are most
delivered from the fear of man. Whitefield the Calvinist, and not Wesley the Arminian,
originated the great religious movement in which the Methodist church was born (see
McFetridge, Calvinism in History, 153), and Spurgeon's ministry has been as fruitful in
conversions as Finney's. See Froude, Essay on Calvinism; Andrew Fuller, Calvinism
and Socinianism compared in their Practical Effects; Atwater, Calvinism in Doctrine
and Life, in Princeton Review, 1876:73; J. A. Smith, Historical Lectures.
</p>

<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>

<p>
Calvinism logically requires the separation of Church and State: though Calvin did
not see this, the Calvinist Roger Williams did. Calvinism logically requires a republican
form of government: Calvin introduced laymen into the government of the church,
and the same principle requires civil liberty as its correlate. Calvinism holds to individualism
and the direct responsibility of the individual to God. In the Netherlands,
in Scotland, in England, in America, Calvinism has powerfully influenced the development
of civil liberty. Ranke: <q>John Calvin was virtually the founder of America.</q>
Motley: <q>To the Calvinists more than to any other class of men, the political liberties
of Holland, England and America are due.</q> John Fiske, The Beginnings of New England:
<q>Perhaps not one of the mediæval popes was more despotic than Calvin; but it
is not the less true that the promulgation of his theology was one of the longest steps
that mankind have taken towards personal freedom.... It was a religion fit to inspire
men who were to be called to fight for freedom, whether in the marshes of the Netherlands
or on the moors of Scotland.</q>
</p>

<p>
Æsop, when asked what was the occupation of Zeus, replied: <q>To humble the exalted
and to exalt the humble.</q> <q>I accept the universe,</q> said Margaret Fuller. Some
one reported this remark to Thomas Carlyle. <q>Gad! she'd better!</q> he replied. Dr. John
Watson (Ian McLaren): <q>The greatest reinforcement religion could have in our
time would be a return to the ancient belief in the sovereignty of God.</q> Whittier:
<q>All is of God that is and is to be, And God is good. Let this suffice us still Resting in
childlike trust upon his will Who moves to his great ends unthwarted by the ill.</q> Every
true minister preaches Arminianism and prays Calvinism. This means simply that there
is more, in God's love and in God's purposes, than man can state or comprehend.
Beecher called Spurgeon a camel with one hump&mdash;Calvinism. Spurgeon called Beecher
a camel without any hump: <q>He does not know what he believes, and you never know
where to find him.</q>
</p>

<p>
Arminians sing: <q>Other refuge have I none; Hangs my helpless soul on thee</q>; yet
John Wesley wrote to the Calvinist Toplady, the author of the hymn: <q>Your God is
my devil.</q> Calvinists replied that it was better to have the throne of the universe
vacant than to have it filled by such a pitiful nonentity as the Arminians worshiped. It
was said of Lord Byron that all his life he believed in Calvinism, and hated it. Oliver
Wendell Holmes similarly, in all his novels except Elsie Venner, makes the orthodox
thinblooded and weakkneed, while his heretics are all strong in body. Dale, Ephesians,
52&mdash;<q>Of the two extremes, the suppression of man which was the offense of Calvinism,
and the suppression of God which was the offense against which Calvinism so fiercely
protested, the fault and error of Calvinism was the nobler and grander.... The most
heroic forms of human courage, strength and righteousness have been found in men
who in their theology seemed to deny the possibility of human virtue and made the
will of God the only real force in the universe.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>2. True method of preaching the doctrine.</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) We should most carefully avoid exaggeration or unnecessarily obnoxious
statement. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) We should emphasize the fact that the decrees are not
grounded in arbitrary will, but in infinite wisdom. (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) We should make
it plain that whatever God does or will do, he must from eternity have purposed
to do. (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) We should illustrate the doctrine so far as possible by
instances of completeness and far-sightedness in human plans of great
enterprises. (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) We may then make extended application of the truth to
the encouragement of the Christian and the admonition of the unbeliever.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
For illustrations of foresight, instance Louis Napoleon's planning the Suez Canal,
and declaring his policy as Emperor, long before he ascended the throne of France.
For instances of practical treatment of the theme in preaching, see Bushnell, Sermon on
Every Man's Life a Plan of God, in Sermons for the New Life; Nehemiah Adams, Evenings
with the Doctrines, 243; Spurgeon's Sermon on <emph>Ps. 44:3&mdash;<q>Because thou hadst a favor unto
them.</q></emph> Robert Browning, Rabbi Ben Ezra: <q>Grow old along with me! The best is yet
to be, The last of life, for which the first was made: Our times are in his hand Who
saith <q>A whole I planned, Youth shows but half; trust God: See all nor be afraid!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
Shakespeare, King Lear, 1:2&mdash;<q>This is the excellent foppery of the world that when
we are sick in fortune (often the surfeit of our own behavior) we make guilty of our
disasters the sun, the moon and the stars, as if we were villains by necessity, fools by
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
heavenly compulsion, and all that we are evil in by a divine thrusting on; an admirable
evasion of man to lay his disposition to the charge of a star!</q> All's Well:
<q>Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie Which we ascribe to heaven: the fated sky Gives
us free scope; only doth backward pull Our slow designs, when we ourselves are
dull.</q> Julius Cæsar, 1:2&mdash;<q>Men at some time are masters of their fates: The fault,
dear Brutus, is not in our stars, But in ourselves, that we are underlings.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
